
--- Page 1 ---
French Republic
République française
Flag
Coat of arms[I]
Motto: "Liberté, égalité, fraternité"
Anthem: "La Marseillaise"
Diplomatic emblem
France
France ,[IX] officially the French Republic ,[X] is a country
located primarily in Western Europe . Its overseas regions and
territories  include French Guiana  in South America , Saint
Pierre and Miquelon  in the North Atlantic, the French West
Indies , and many islands  in Oceania  and the Indian Ocean ,
giving it one of the largest discontiguous exclusive economic
zones in the world . Metropolitan France  shares borders with
Belgium  and Luxembour g to the north; Germany  to the
northeast; Switzerland  to the east; Italy and Monaco  to the
southeast; Andorra  and Spain  to the south; and a maritime
border with the United Kingdom  to the northwest. Its
metropolitan area extends from the Rhine  to the Atlantic
Ocean  and from the Mediterranean Sea to the English
Channel  and the North Sea. Its eighteen integral regions —five
of which are overseas—span a combined area of 632,702 km2
(244,288 sq mi) and have an estimated total population  of
over 68.6 million as of January 2025 . France is a semi-
presidential republic  and its capital, largest city and main
cultural and economic centre is Paris .
Metropolitan France was settled during the Iron Age by Celtic
tribes  known as Gauls  before Rome annexed the area in 51
BC, leading to a distinct Gallo-Roman culture . In the Early
Middle Ages , the Franks  formed the kingdom of Francia ,
which became the heartland of the Carolingian Empire . The
Treaty of Verdun  of 843 partitioned the empire, with West
Francia  evolving into the Kingdom of France . In the High
Middle Ages , France was a powerful but decentralized feudal
kingdom, but from the mid-14th to the mid-15th centuries,
France was plunged into a dynastic conflict with England
known as the Hundred Years' War. In the 16th century , French
culture  flourished during the French Renaissance  and a French
colonial empire  emer ged. Internally , France was domina ted by
the conflict with the House of Habsbur g and the French Wars
of Religion  between Catholics  and Huguenots . France was
successful in the Thirty Years' War and further increased its
influence during the reign of Louis XIV .
The French Revolution  of 1789 overthrew the Ancien Régime
and produced the Declaration of the Rights of Man, which
expresses the nation's ideals to this day. France reached its
political and military zenith in the early 19th century  under
Napoleon Bonaparte , subjugating part of continental Europe
and establishing the First French Empire . The collapse of theLiberty, equality, fraternity
0:000:00
/ 0:00/ 0:00



--- Page 2 ---
Capital
and largest cityParis
48°51′N 2°21′E
Official language
and national
languageFrench[II]
Nationality (2021)[3]92.2% French
7.8% other
Religion (2021)[4]50% Christianity
33% irreligion
4% Islam
4% other religions
Demonym(s) French
Government Unitary semi-
presidential republicempire initiated a period of relative decline, in which France
endured the Bourbon Restoration  until the founding of the
French Second Republic  which was succeeded by the Second
French Empire  upon Napoleon III's takeover . His empire
collapsed during the Franco-Prussian War in 1870. This led to
the establishment of the Third French Republic , and
subsequent decades saw a period of economic prosperity and
cultural and scientific flourishing known as the Belle Époque .
France was one of the major participants  of World War I, from
which it emer ged victorious  at great human and economic
cost. It was among the Allies of World War II, but it
surrendered and was occupied  in 1940. Following its
liberation in 1944 , the short-lived Fourth Republic  was
established and later dissolved in the course of the defeat in
the Algerian War. The current Fifth Republic  was formed in
1958 by Charles de Gaulle . Algeria  and most French colonies
became independent in the 1960s, with the majority retaining
close economic and military ties with France .
France retains its centuries-long status as a global centre of
art, science , and philosophy . It hosts  the fourth-lar gest number
of UNESCO World Heritage Sites  and is the world's leading
tourist destination , having received 100 million foreign
visitors in 2023 . A developed country , France has a high
nominal per capita income globally , and its advanced
economy  ranks among the largest in the world by both
nominal GDP  and PPP-adjusted GDP . It is a great power ,
being one of the five permanent members of the United
Nations Security Council  and an official nuclear -weapon state.
The country is part of multiple international organizations and
forums .
Originally applied to the whole Frankish Empire , the name
France  comes from the Latin  Francia , or 'realm of the
Franks '.[13] The name of the Franks  is related to the English
word frank  ('free'): the latter stems from the Old French  franc
('free, noble, sincere'), and ultimately from the Medieval Latin
word francus  ('free, exempt from service; freeman, Frank"', a
generalisation of the tribal name that emer ged as a Late Latin
borrowing of the reconstructed Frankish  endonym
*Frank .[14][15] It has been suggested that the meaning 'free'
was adopted because, after the conquest of Gaul , only Franks
were free of taxation,[16] or more generally because they had
the status of freemen in contrast to servants or slaves .[15] The
etymology of *Frank  is uncertain. It is traditionally derived
from the Proto-Germanic  word *frankōn , which translates asLocation of France (blue or dark green)
– in Europe  (green & dark grey)
– in the European Union  (green)Etymology


--- Page 3 ---
• President Emmanuel Macron
• Prime Minister François Bayrou
• President of the
SenateGérard Larcher
• President of the
National AssemblyYaël Braun-Pivet
Legislature Parliament
• Upper house Senate
• Lower house National Assembly
Establishment
• Kingdom of the
West Franks –
Treaty of Verdun10 August 843
• French Republic –
French First
Republic22 September 1792
• Current constitution
– French Fifth
Republic4 October 1958
Area
• Total 632,702.3 km2
(244,287.7 sq mi)
(including
metropolitan France
and overseas France
and excluding Terre
Adelie)[6] (42nd)
• Water (%) 0.86[5]
• Metropolitan
France (DGCL)543,941 km2
(210,017 sq mi)[7]
(50th)
• Metropolitan
France (INSEE)543,908.3 km2
(210,004.2 sq mi)[6][III]
(50th)
Population
• January 2025
estimate
 68,605,616[8]
(20th)
• Density 108/km2 (281/sq mi)
(106th)
• Metropolitan
France, estimate
as of January
2025
 66,351,959[8] (21st)
• Density 122/km2 (316.0/sq mi)
(89th)
GDP (PPP) 2024 estimate
• Total
  $4.359 trillion[9]
(9th)
• Per capita
  $65,940[9] (22nd)
GDP (nominal) 2024 estimate
• Total
  $3.174 trillion[9]
(7th)
• Per capita
  $48,011[9] (22nd)'javelin' or 'lance' (the throwing axe of the Franks was known
as the francisca ),[17] although these weapons may have been
named because of their use by the Franks, not the other way
around.[15]
In English, 'France' is pronounced /fræns/ FRANSS in
American English and /fr ɑ ːns/ FRAHNSS or /fræns/ FRANSS in
British English. The pronunciation with / ɑ ː/ is mostly
confined to accents with the trap-bath split such as Received
Pronunciation , though it can be also heard in some other
dialects such as Cardif f English .[18]
The oldest traces of archaic humans  in what is now France
date from approximately 1.8 million years ago.[19]
Neanderthals  occupied the region into the Upper Paleolithic
era but were slowly replaced by Homo sapiens  around 35,000
BC.[20] This period witnessed the emer gence of cave painting
in the Dordogne  and Pyrenees , including at Lascaux , dated to
c. 18,000  BC.[19] At the end of the Last Glacial Period  (10,000
BC), the climate became milder;[19] from approximately
7,000 BC, this part of Western Europe entered the Neolithic
era, and its inhabitants became sedentary .
After demographic and agricultural  development between the
4th and 3rd millennia BC, metallur gy appeared , initially
working gold, copper  and bronze , then later iron.[21] France
has numerous megalithic  sites from the Neolithic , including
the Carnac stones  site (approximately 3,300 BC).
In 600 BC, Ionian  Greeks  from Phocaea  founded the colony
of Massalia  (present-day Marseille ).[22] Celtic tribes
penetrated parts of eastern and northern France, spreading
through the rest of the country between the 5th and 3rd
century BC.[23] Around 390 BC, the Gallic chieftain  Brennus
and his troops made their way to Roman Italy, defeated the
Romans in the Battle of the Allia , and besieged and ransomed
Rome.[24] This left Rome weakened, and the Gauls continued
to harass the region until 345 BC when they entered into a
peace treaty .[25] But the Romans  and the Gauls  remained
adversaries for centuries.[26]History
Pre-6th century BC
Antiquity (6th century BC – 5th century AD)


--- Page 4 ---
Gini (2022)
  29.8[10]
low inequality
HDI (2022)
  0.910[11]
very high (28th)
Currency Euro (€) (EUR)[IV]
CFP franc (XPF)[V]
Time zone UTC+1 (CET[VI])
• Summer (DST) UTC+2 (CEST)
Calling code +33[VII]
ISO 3166 code FR
Internet TLD .fr[VIII]
Source gives area of metropolitan France as
551,500 km2 (212,900 sq mi) and lists
overseas regions separately, whose areas
sum to 89,179 km2 (34,432 sq mi). Adding
these give the total shown here for the entire
French Republic. The World Factbook reports
the total as 643,801 km2 (248,573 sq mi).
The Maison carrée was a temple of the
Gallo-Roman city of Nemausus (present-
day Nîmes) and is one of the best-
preserved Roman temples anywhere.Around 125 BC, the south of Gaul was conquered by the
Romans, who called this region Provincia Nostra  ("Our
Province"), which evolved into Provence  in French.[27] Julius
Caesar  conquered the remainder of Gaul and overcame a
revolt by Gallic chieftain Vercingetorix  in 52 BC.[28] Gaul
was divided by Augustus  into provinces[29] and many cities
were founded during the Gallo-Roman period , including
Lugdunum  (present-day Lyon), the capital of the Gauls.[29] In
250–290 AD, Roman Gaul suffered a crisis with its fortified
borders  attacked by barbarians .[30] The situation improved in
the first half of the 4th century , a period of revival and
prosperity .[31] In 312, Emperor Constantine I converted to
Christianity . Christians, who had been persecuted,
increased.[32] But from the 5th century , the Barbarian
Invasions  resumed.[33] Teutonic  tribes invaded the region, the
Visigoths  settling in the southwest, the Burgundians  along the
Rhine River Valley , and the Franks in the north.[34]
In Late antiquity , ancient Gaul was divided into Germanic
kingdoms and a remaining Gallo-Roman territory . Celtic Britons ,
fleeing the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain , settled in west
Armorica ; the Armorican peninsula was renamed Brittany  and Celtic
culture  was revived.
The first leader to unite all Franks was Clovis I, who began his reign
as king of the Salian Franks  in 481, routing the last forces of the
Roman governors in 486. Clovis said he would be baptised a
Christian in the event of victory against the Visigothic Kingdom ,
which was said to have guaranteed the battle. Clovis regained the
southwest from the Visigoths  and was baptised in 508. Clovis I was
the first Germanic  conqueror after the Fall of the Western Roman
Empire  to convert to Catholic Christianity; thus France was given the
title "Eldest daughter of the Church" by the papacy ,[35] and French
kings called "the Most Christian Kings of France".
The Franks embraced the Christian Gallo-Roman culture , and ancient Gaul was renamed Francia  ("Land of the
Franks"). The Germanic Franks adopted Romanic languages . Clovis made Paris  his capital and established the
Merovingian dynasty , but his kingdom would not survive his death. The Franks treated land as a private
possession and divided it among their heirs, so four kingdoms emer ged from that of Clovis: Paris, Orléans ,
Soissons , and Rheims . The last Merovingian kings  lost power  to their mayors of the palace  (head of household).
One mayor of the palace, Charles Martel , defeated an Umayyad  invasion of Gaul  at the Battle of Tours in
732.[36] His son, Pepin the Short , seized the crown of Francia from the weakened Merovingians  and founded the
Carolingian dynasty . Pepin's son, Charlemagne , reunited the Frankish kingdoms and built an empire across
Western  and Central Europe .
Proclaimed Holy Roman Emperor  by Pope Leo III and thus establishing the French government's longtime
historical association  with the Catholic Church ,[37] Charlemagne tried to revive the Western Roman Empire  and
its cultural grandeur . Charlemagne's son, Louis I kept the empire united, however in 843, it was divided betweenEarly Middle Ages (5th–10th century)


--- Page 5 ---
With Clovis's conversion to Catholicism in
498, the Frankish monarchy, elective and
secular until then, became hereditary and
of divine right.
Joan of Arc led the French Army
to several important victories
during the Hundred Years' War
(1337–1453), which paved the
way for the final victory.Louis' three sons, into East Francia , Middle Francia  and West
Francia . West Francia approximated the area occupied by modern
France and was its precursor .[38]
During the 9th and 10th centuries, threatened by Viking invasions ,
France became a decentralised state: the nobility's titles and lands
became hereditary , and the authority of the king became more
religious than secular , and so was less effective and challenged by
noblemen. Thus was established feudalism  in France. Some king's
vassals grew so powerful they posed a threat to the king. After the
Battle of Hastings  in 1066, William the Conqueror  added "King of
England" to his titles, becoming vassal and the equal of the king of
France, creating recurring tensions.
The Carolingian dynasty ruled France until 987, when Hugh Capet
was crowned king of the Franks .[39] His descendants unified the
country through wars and inheritance. From 1190, the Capetian
rulers began to be referred as "kings of France" rather than "kings of
the Franks".[40] Later kings expanded their directl y possessed
domaine royal to cover over half of modern France by the 15th
century . Royal authority became more assertive, centred on a hierarchically
conceived society  distinguishing nobility , cler gy, and commoners .
The nobility played a prominent role in Crusades  to restore Christian access
to the Holy Land . French knights made up most reinforcements in the 200
years of the Crusades, in such a fashion that the Arabs referred to crusaders
as Franj .[41] French Crusaders imported French into the Levant , making Old
French  the base of the lingua franca  ("Frankish language") of the Crusader
states .[41] The Albigensian Crusade  was launched in 1209 to eliminate the
heretical Cathars  in the southwest of modern-day France.[42]
From the 11th century , the House of Plantagenet , rulers of the County of
Anjou , established its dominion over the surrounding provinces of Maine
and Touraine , then built an "empire" from England to the Pyrenees , covering
half of modern France. Tensions between France and the Plantagenet empire
would last a hundred years, until Philip II of France  conquered, between
1202 and 1214, most continental posses sions of the empire, leaving England
and Aquitaine  to the Plantagenets.
Charles IV the Fair died without an heir in 1328.[43] The crown passed to
Philip of Valois , rather than Edward of Plantagenet, who became Edward III
of England . During the reign of Philip, the monarchy reached the height of its medieval power .[43] However
Philip's seat on the throne was contested by Edward in 1337, and England and France entered the off-and-on
Hundred Years' War.[44] Boundaries changed, but landholdings inside France by English Kings remained
extensive for decades. With charismatic leaders, such as Joan of Arc, French counterattacks won back most
English continental territories. France was struck by the Black Death , from which half of the 17 million
population died.[45]High and Late Middle Ages (10th–15th century)


--- Page 6 ---
Louis XIV, the "Sun King", was
the absolute monarch of France
and made France the leading
European power.The French Renaissance  saw cultural development and standardisation of French, which became the official
language of France  and Europe's aristocracy . France became rivals of the House of Habsbur g during the Italian
Wars, which would dictate much of their later foreign policy until the mid-18th century . French explorers
claimed lands in the Americas, paving expansion of the French colonial empire . The rise of Protestantism led
France to a civil war known as the French Wars of Religion .[46] This forced Huguenots  to flee to Protestant
regions such as the British Isles and Switzerland . The wars were ended by Henry IV's Edict of Nantes , which
granted some freedom of religion to the Huguenots. Spanish  troops[47] assisted the Catholics from 1589 to 1594
and invaded France in 1597. Spain and France returned to all-out war between 1635 and 1659. The war cost
France 300,000 casualties.[48]
Under Louis XIII, Cardinal Richelieu  promoted centralisation of the state and reinforced royal power . He
destroyed castles of defiant lords and denounced the use of private armies. By the end of the 1620s, Richelieu
established "the royal monopoly of force".[49] France fought in the Thirty Years' War, supporting the Protestant
side against the Habsbur gs. From the 16th to the 19th century , France was responsible for about 10% of the
transatlantic slave trade .[50]
During Louis XIV's minority , trouble known as The Fronde  occurred. This
rebellion was driven by feudal lords and sovereign courts  as a reaction to the
royal absolute power . The monarchy reached its peak during the 17th
century and reign of Louis XIV, during which France further increased its
influence.[51] By turning lords into courtiers  at the Palace of Versailles , his
command of the military went unchallenged. The "Sun King" made France
the leading European power . France became the most populous European
country  and had tremendous influence over European politics, economy , and
culture. French became the most-used language in diplomacy , science , and
literature until the 20th century .[52] France took control of territories in the
Americas, Africa and Asia. In 1685, Louis XIV revoked the Edict of Nantes ,
forcing thousands of Huguenots into exile and published the Code Noir
providing the legal framework for slavery and expelling Jews from French
colonies.[53]
Under the wars of Louis XV (r. 1715–1774), France lost New France  and
most Indian possessions  after its defeat in the Seven Years' War (1756–
1763). Its European territory  kept growing, however , with acquisitio ns such
as Lorraine  and Corsica . Louis XV's weak rule, including the decadence of
his court, discredited the monarchy , which in part paved the way for the
French Revolution .[54]
Louis XVI (r. 1774–1793) supported America with money , fleets and armies , helping them win independence
from Great Britain . France gained revenge, but verged on bankruptcy—a factor that contributed to the
Revolution. Some of the Enlightenment  occurred in French intellectual circles , and scientific breakthroughs,
such as the naming of oxygen  (1778) and the first hot air balloon carrying passengers  (1783), were achieved by
French scientists. French explorers took part in the voyages of scientific exploration  through maritime
expeditions. Enlightenment philosophy , in which reason  is advocated as the primary source of legitimacy ,
undermined the power of and support for the monarchy and was a factor in the Revolution.Early modern period (15th century–1789)


--- Page 7 ---
The Storming of the Bastille on 14 July
1789 was the most emblematic event of
the French Revolution.
Napoleon, Emperor of the
French, built a vast empire
across Europe.[57]The French Revolution was a period of political and societal change
that began with the Estates General of 1789 , and ended with the coup
of 18 Brumaire  in 1799 and the formation of the French Consulate .
Many of its ideas are fundamental principles of liberal
democracy ,[55] while its values and institutions remain central to
modern political discourse.[56]
Its causes  were a combination of social, political and economic
factors, which the Ancien Régime  proved unable to manage. A
financial crisis and social distress led in May 1789 to the
convocation  of the Estates General , which was converted into a
National Assembly  in June. The Storming of the Bastille  on 14 July
led to a series of radical measures by the Assembly , among them the
abolition of feudalism , state control over the Catholic Church in
France , and a declaration of rights .
The next three years were dominated by struggle for political control, exacerbated by economic depression .
Military defeats following the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars in April 1792 resulted in the
insurrection of 10 August 1792 . The monarchy was abolished  and replaced by the French First Republic  in
September , while Louis XVI was executed  in January 1793.
After another revolt in June 1793 , the constitution was suspended and power passed from the National
Convention  to the Committee of Public Safety . About 16,000 people were executed in a Reign of Terror , which
ended in July 1794 . Weakened by external threats and internal opposition, the Republic was replaced in 1795 by
the Directory . Four years later in 1799, the Consulate  seized power in a coup  led by Napoleon .
Napoleon became First Consul  in 1799 and later Emperor  of the French
Empire  (1804–1814; 1815). Changing sets of European coalitions  declared
wars on Napoleon's empire . His armies conquered most of continental Europe
with swift victories such as the battles of Jena-Auerstadt  and Austerlitz .
Members of the Bonaparte  family were appointed monarchs in some of the
newly established kingdoms.[58]
These victories led to the worldwide expansion of French revolutionary ideals
and reforms, such as the metric system , Napoleonic Code  and Declaration of
the Rights of Man. In 1812 Napoleon attacked Russia , reaching Moscow .
Thereafter his army disintegrated through supply problems, disease, Russian
attacks, and finally winter . After this catastrophic campaign and the ensuing
uprising of European monarchies  against his rule, Napoleon was defeated.
About a million Frenchmen died during the Napoleonic Wars.[58] After his
brief return  from exile, Napoleon was finally defeated in 1815 at the Battle of
Waterloo , and the Bourbon monarchy was restored  with new constitutional
limitations.
The discredited Bourbon dynasty was overthrown by the July Revolution  of
1830, which established the constitutional July Monarchy ; French troops
began the conquest of Algeria . Unrest led to the French Revolution of 1848  and the end of the July Monarchy .Revolutionary France (1789–1799)
Napoleon and 19th century (1799–1914)


--- Page 8 ---
The first (light blue) and second (dark blue) French colonial empire
French Poilus posing with their war-torn
flag in 1917, during World War IThe abolition of slavery and the introduction of male universal suffrage was re-enacted in 1848. In 1852,
president of the French Republic, Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte , Napoleon I's nephew , was proclaimed emperor of
the Second Empire , as Napoleon III. He multiplied French interventions abroad, especially in Crimea , Mexico
and Italy. Napoleon III was unseated following defeat in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, and his regime was
replaced by the Third Republic . By 1875, the French conquest of Algeria was complete, with approximately
825,000 Algerians killed from famine, disease, and violence.[59]
France had colonial possessions  since the
beginning of the 17th century , but in the 19th
and 20th centuries its empire  extended
greatly and became the second-lar gest behind
the British Empire .[60] Including metropolitan
France, the total area reached almost
13 million square kilometres in the 1920s and
1930s, 9% of the world's land. Known as the
Belle Époque , the turn of the century was
characterised by optimism, regional peace,
economic prosperity and technological,
scientific and cultural innovations. In 1905,
state secularism  was officially established .
France was invaded by Germany and defended by Great Britain  at
the start of World War I in August 1914. A rich industrial area in the
north was occupied. France and the Allies  emer ged victorious against
the Central Powers  at tremendous human cost. It left 1.4 million
French soldiers dead, 4% of its population.[61][62] Interwar was
marked by intense international tensions  and social reforms
introduced by the Popular Front government  (e.g., annual leave ,
eight-hour workdays , women in government ).
In 1940, France was invaded and quickly defeated  by Nazi Germany .
France was divided into a German occupation zone  in the north, an
Italian occupation zone  and an unoccupied territory , the rest of
France, which consisted of southern France and the French empire.
The Vichy government , an authoritarian regime collaborating with Germany , ruled the unoccupied territory. Free
France , the government-in-exile led by Charles de Gaulle , was set up in London.[63]
From 1942 to 1944, about 160,000 French citizens, including around 75,000 Jews ,[64] were deported to death
and concentration camps .[65] On 6 June 1944, the Allies  invaded Normandy , and in August they invaded
Provence . The Allies and French Resistance  emer ged victorious, and French sovere ignty was restored with the
Provisional Government of the French Republic  (GPRF). This interim government, established by de Gaulle,
continued to wage war against Germany  and to purge collaborators from office. It made important reforms e.g.
suffrage extended to women and the creation of a social security  system.
A new constitution resulted in the Fourth Republic  (1946–1958), which saw strong econom ic growth (les Trente
Glorieuses ). France was a founding member of NATO and attempted to regain control of French Indochina , but
was defeated by the Viet Minh  in 1954. France faced another anti-colonialist  conflict in Algeria , then part ofEarly to mid-20th century (1914–1946)
1946–present


--- Page 9 ---
Charles de Gaulle, a hero of
World War I, leader of the Free
French during World War II, and
President of FranceFrance and home to over one million European settlers (Pied-Noir ). The
French systematically used torture and repression, including extrajudicial
killings to keep control.[66] This conflict nearly led to a coup and civil
war.[67]
During the May 1958 crisis , the weak Fourth Republic gave way to the Fifth
Republic , which included a strengthened presidency .[68] The war concluded
with the Évian Accords  in 1962 which led to Algerian independence , at a
high price: between half a million and one million deaths and over 2 million
internally-displaced Algerians.[69] Around one million Pied-Noirs and Harkis
fled from Algeria to France.[70] A vestige of the empire is the French
overseas departments and territories .
During the Cold War, de Gaulle pursued a policy of "national independence"
towards the Western  and Eastern blocs . He withdrew from NATO's military-
integrated command (while remaining within the alliance), launched a
nuclear development programme  and made France the fourth nuclear power .
He restored  cordial Franco-German relations  to create a European
counterweight between American and Soviet spheres of influence. However ,
he opposed any development of a supranational Europe , favouring sovereign
nations . The revolt of May 1968  had an enormous social impact; it was a watershed moment when a
conservative moral ideal (religion, patriotism, respect for authority) shifted to a more liberal moral ideal
(secularism, individualism, sexual revolution). Although the revolt was a political failure (the Gaullist  party
emer ged stronger than before) it announced a split between the French and de Gaulle, who resigned.[71]
In the post-Gaullist era, France remained one of the most developed economies in the world  but faced crises that
resulted in high unemployment rates and increasing public debt. In the late 20th and early 21st centuries, France
has been at the forefront of the development of a supranational European Union , notably by signing the
Maastricht Treaty  in 1992, establishing the eurozone  in 1999[72] and signing the Treaty of Lisbon  in 2007.[73]
France has fully reintegrated into NATO and since participated in most NATO-sponsored wars.[74] Since the
19th century , France has received many immigrants , often male foreign workers  from European Catholic
countries who generally returned home when not employed.[75] During the 1970s France faced an economic
crisis and allowed new immigrants (mostly from the Maghreb , in northwest Africa)[75] to permanently settle in
France with their families  and acquire citizenship. It resulted in hundreds of thousands of Muslims living in
subsidised public housing and suffering from high unemployment rates.[76] The government had a policy of
assimilation  of immigrants, where they were expected to adhere to French values and norms.[77]
Since the 1995 public transport bombings , France has been targeted by Islamist organisations, notably the
Charlie Hebdo  attack  in 2015 which provoked the largest public rallies  in French history , gathering 4.4 million
people,[78] the November 2015 Paris attacks  which resulted in 130 deaths, the deadliest attack on French soil
since World War II[79] and the deadliest in the European Union since the Madrid train bombings in 2004 .[80]
Opération Chammal , France's military efforts to contain ISIS, killed over 1,000 ISIS troops between 2014 and
2015.[81]
The vast majority of France's territory and population is situated in Western Europe and is called Metropolitan
France . It is bordered by the North Sea in the north, the English Channel  in the northwest, the Atlantic Ocean  in
the west and the Mediterranean Sea in the southeast. Its land borders consis t of Belgium  and Luxembour g in the
northeast, Germany  and Switzerland  in the east, Italy and Monaco  in the southeast, and Andorra  and Spain  in theGeography


--- Page 10 ---
Chamonix valley with the Mont Blanc at
background, the highest mountain in the
Alps and Western Europe on the border
with Italy
Geological formations near Roussillon,
Vauclusesouth and southwest. Except for the northeast, most of France's land
borders are roughly delineated by natural boundaries and geographic
features: to the south and southeast, the Pyrenees and the Alps and
the Jura, respectively , and to the east, the Rhine river. Metropolitan
France includes various coastal islands, of which the largest is
Corsica . Metropolitan France is situated mostly between latitudes
41° and 51° N, and longitudes 6° W and 10° E, on the western edge
of Europe, and thus lies within the northern temperate  zone. Its
continental part covers about 1000 km from north to south and from
east to west.
Metropolitan France covers 551,500 square kilometres
(212,935 sq mi),[82] the largest among European Union  members.[72]
France's total land area, with its overseas departments and territories
(excluding Adélie Land ), is 643,801 km2 (248,573 sq mi),[83] 0.45% of the total land area on Earth. France
possesses a wide variety of landscapes, from coastal plains in the north and west to the mountain ranges of the
Alps  in the southeast, the Massif Central  in the south-central and Pyrenees  in the southwest.
Due to its numerous overseas departments and territories  scattered across the planet, France possesses the
second-lar gest exclusive economic zone  (EEZ) in the world, covering 11,035,000 km2 (4,261,000 sq mi). Its
EEZ covers approximately 8% of the total surface of all the EEZs of the world.
Metropolitan France has a wide variety of topographic sets and
natural landscapes. During the Hercynian uplift  in the Paleozoic Era,
the Armorican Massif , the Massif Central , the Morvan , the Vosges
and Ardennes  ranges and the island of Corsica  were formed. These
massifs delineate several sedimentary basins such as the Aquitaine
Basin  in the southwest and the Paris Basin  in the north. Various
routes of natural passage, such as the Rhône Valley , allow easy
communication. The Alpine, Pyrenean and Jura mountains are much
younger and have less eroded forms. At 4,810.45 metres
(15,782 ft)[84] above sea level, Mont Blanc , located in the Alps on
the France–Italy border , is the highest point in Western Europe.
Although 60% of municipalities are classified as having seismic
risks (though moderate).
The coastlines offer contrasting landscapes: mountain ranges along the French Riviera , coastal cliffs such as the
Côte d'Albâtre , and wide sandy plains in the Languedoc . Corsica lies off the Mediterranean coast. France has an
extensive river system consisting of the four major rivers Seine , the Loire , the Garonne , the Rhône  and their
tributaries, whose combined catchment includes over 62% of the metropolitan territory . The Rhône divides the
Massif Central from the Alps and flows into the Mediterranean Sea at the Camar gue. The Garonne meets the
Dordogne  just after Bordeaux, forming the Gironde estuary , the largest estuary in Western Europe which after
approximately 100 kilometres (62 mi) empties into the Atlantic Ocean.[85] Other water courses drain towards the
Meuse and Rhine along the northeastern borders. France has 11,000,000 km2 (4,200,000 sq mi) of marine waters
within three oceans under its jurisdiction, of which 97% are overseas.Geology, topography and hydrography


--- Page 11 ---
The Gironde estuary is classified as a
marine nature park and is part of the
Natura 2000 network. The left bank is
part of the Médoc regional nature park.
With a surface area of 635 km2 (245 sq
mi), it is the largest estuary in Europe.France was one of the first countries to create an environment ministry , in 1971.[86] France is ranked 19th by
carbon dioxide emissions  due to the country's heavy investment in nuclear power  following the 1973 oil
crisis ,[87] which now accounts for 75 per cent of its electricity production[88] and results in less pollution.[89][90]
According to the 2020 Environmental Performance Index  conducted by Yale and Columbia , France was the fifth
most environmentally conscious country in the world.[91][92]
Like all European Union state members, France agreed to cut carbon emissions  by at least 20% of 1990 levels by
2020.[93] As of 2009 , French carbon dioxide emissions per capita are lower than that of China.[94] The country
was set to impose a carbon tax in 2009;[95] however , the plan was abandoned due to fears of it burdening French
businesses.[96]
Forests account for 31 per cent of France's land area—the fourth-
highest proportion in Europe—representing an increase of 7 per cent
since 1990.[97][98][99] French forests are some of the most diverse in
Europe, comprising more than 140 species of trees.[100] France had a
2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index  mean score of 4.52/10,
ranking it 123rd globally .[101] There are nine national parks[102] and
46 natural parks  in France.[103] A regional nature park[104] (French:
parc natur el régional  or PNR) is a public establishment in France
between local authorities and the national government  covering an
inhabited rural area of outstanding beauty , to protect the scenery and
heritage as well as setting up sustainable economic development in
the area.[105][106] As of 2019  there are 54 PNRs in France.[107]
France is a representative democracy  organised as a unitary semi-presidential republic .[108] Democratic
traditions and values are deeply rooted in French culture, identity and politics.[109] The Constitution of the Fifth
Republic was approved by referendum  in 1958, establishing a framework consisting of executive, legislative and
judicial branches.[110] It sought to address the instability of the Third and Fourth Republics by combining
elements of both the parliamentary and presidential systems, while greatly strengthening the authority of the
executive relative to the legislature.[109]
The executive branch has two leaders. The president , who has been Emmanuel Macron  since 2017, is the head of
state, elected directly by universal adult suffrage for a five-year term.[111] The prime minister , who has been
François Bayrou  since 2024, is the head of government , appointed by the President to lead the government . The
president has the power to dissolve Parliament or circumvent it by submitting referendums directly to the people;
the president also appoints judges and civil servants, negotiates and ratifies international agreements, as well as
serves as commander -in-chief of the Armed Forces. The prime minister determines public policy and oversees
the civil service, with an emphasis on domestic matters.[112] In the 2022 presidential election , Macron was re-
elected.[113] Two months later, in the legislative elections , Macron lost his parliamentary majori ty and had to
form a minority government .[114]
The legislature consists of the French Parliament , a bicameral  body made up of a lower house , the National
Assembly  and an upper house , the Senate .[115] Legislators in the National Assembly , known as députés ,
represent local constituencies and are directly elected for five-year terms.[116] The Assembly has the power toEnvironment
Politics
Government


--- Page 12 ---
Emmanuel Macron
President
since 2017
François Bayrou
Prime Minister
since 2024
Palais Bourbon, the meeting place of the
National Assembly, the lower legislative
chamber of the French Parliamentdismiss the government by majority vote. Senators are
chosen by an electoral college for six-year terms, with half
the seats submitted to election every three years.[117] The
Senate's legislative powers are limited; in the event of
disagreement between the two chambers, the National
Assembly has the final say.[118] The parliament is
responsible for determining the rules and principles
concerning most areas of law, political amnesty , and fiscal
policy; however , the government may draft specific details
concerning most laws.
From World War II until 2017, French politics was
dominated by two politically opposed groupings: one left-
wing, the French Section of the Workers' International ,
which was succeeded by the Socialist Party  (in 1969); and
the other right-wing, the Gaullist Party , whose name
changed over time to the Rally of the French People  (1947), the
Union of Democrats for the Republic  (1958), the Rally for the
Republic  (1976), the Union for a Popular Movement  (2007) and The
Republicans  (since 2015). In the 2017 presidential and legislative
elections, the radical centrist  party La République En Marche!
(LREM) became the dominant force, overtaking both Socialists and
Republicans. LREM's opponent in the second round of the 2017 and
2022 presidential elections was the growing far-right party National
Rally  (RN). Since 2020, Europe Ecology – The Greens  (EEL V) have
performed well in mayoral elections in major cities[119] while on a
national level, an alliance of Left parties (the NUPES ) was the
second-lar gest voting block elected to the lower house in 2022.[120]
Right-wing populist  RN became the largest opposition party in the
National Assembly in 2022.[121]
The electorate is constitutionally empowered to vote on amendments passed by the Parliament and bills
submitted by the president. Referendums have played a key role in shaping French politics and even foreign
policy; voters have decided on such matters as Algeria's independence, the election of the president by popular
vote, the formation of the EU, and the reduction of presidential term limits.[122]
France is divided into 18 regions  (located in Europe and overseas), five overseas collectivities , one overseas
territory , one special collectivity— New Caledonia  and one uninhabited island directly under the authority of the
Minister of Overseas France— Clipperton .
Since 2016, France is divided into 18 administrative regions: 13 regions in metropolitan France  (including
Corsica ),[123] and five overseas .[82] The regions are further subdivided into 101 departments ,[124] which are
numbered mainly alphabetically . The department number is used in postal codes and was formerly used on
vehicle registration plates . Among the 101 French departments, five (French Guiana , Guadeloupe, Martinique ,
Mayotte , and Réunion ) are in overseas regions (ROMs) that are simultaneously overseas departments (DOMs),
enjoying the same status as metropolitan departments and are thereby included in the European Union.Administrative divisions
Regions


--- Page 13 ---
88 states and governments are part of La
Francophonie,[135] which promotes
values of democracy, multilingualism and
cultural diversity.[136] France has been a
key member of this global organisation
since its inception in 1970.The 101 departments are subdivided into
335 arrondissements , which are, in turn,
subdivided into 2,054 cantons .[125] These
cantons are then divided into 36,658
communes , which are municipalities with an
elected municipal council.[125] Three
communes—Paris, Lyon and Marseille—are
subdivided into 45 municipal
arrondissements .
In addition to the 18 regions and 101
departments, the French Republic has five
overseas collectivities  (French Polynesia ,
Saint Barthélemy , Saint Martin , Saint Pierre
and Miquelon , and Wallis and Futuna ), one
sui generis  collectivity (New Caledonia ),
one overseas territory  (French Southern and
Antarctic Lands ), and one island possession
in the Pacific Ocean (Clipperton Island ). Overseas collectivities and territories form part of the French Republic,
but do not form part of the European Union or its fiscal area (except for Saint Barthélemy , which seceded from
Guadeloupe in 2007). The Pacific Collectivities (COMs) of French Polynesi a, Wallis and Futuna, and New
Caledonia continue to use the CFP franc[126] whose value is strictly linked to that of the euro. In contrast, the
five overseas regions used the French franc and now use the euro.[127]
France is a founding member of the United Nations and serves as one of the permanent members of the UN
Security Council  with veto rights.[128] In 2015, it was described as "the best networked state in the world" due to
its membership in more international institutions than any other country;[129] these include the G7, World Trade
Organization  (WTO),[130] the Pacific Community  (SPC)[131] and the Indian Ocean Commission  (COI).[132] It is
an associate member of the Association of Caribbean States  (ACS)[133] and a leading member of the
Organisation internationale de la Francophonie  (OIF) of 84 French-speaking countries.[134]
As a significant hub for international relations, France has the third-
largest assembly  of diplomatic missions , second only to China and
the United States. It also hosts the headquarters of several
international organisations , including the OECD , UNESCO , Interpol ,
the International Bureau of Weights and Measures , and the OIF .[137]
French foreign policy after World War II has been largely shaped by
membership in the European Union, of which it was a founding
member . Since the 1960s , France has developed close ties with
reunified Germany to become the most influential driving force of
the EU.[138] Since 1904, France has maintained an "Entente
cordiale " with the United Kingdom, and there has been a
strengthening of links between the countries, especially militarily .
Hauts-de-
France
NormandyÎle-de-
FranceGrand Est
Bourgogne-
Franche-
ComtéCentre-
Val de LoirePays de
la LoireBrittany
Nouvelle-
AquitaineAuvergne-
Rhône-Alpes
OccitaniaProvence-
Alpes-
Côte d'Azur
CorsicaFrench GuianaGuadeloupe
Martinique
MayotteRéunionBelgium
Luxembourg
Germany
SwitzerlandLiechtenstein
Italy
MonacoUnited Kingdom
AndorraBrazilSuriname
SpainChannel
Bay of
Biscay
Ligurian
Sea
Mediterranean
SeaOverseas territories and collectivities
Foreign relations


--- Page 14 ---
The European Parliament in Strasbourg
(near the border with Germany). France
is a founding member of all EU
institutions.
  France
  French military interventions since
2001: Afghanistan; Ivory Coast; Chad;
Libya; Somalia; Mali; Central African
Republic; Syria; Iraq.France is a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), but under President de Gaulle excluded itself from the joint
military command, in protest of the Special Relationship  between the
United States and Britain, and to preserve the independence of
French foreign and security policies. Under Nicolas Sarkozy , France
rejoined the NATO joint military command on 4 April
2009.[139][140][141]
France retains strong political and econ omic influence in its former
African colonies  (Françafrique )[142] and has supplied economic aid
and troops for peacekeeping missions in Ivory Coast  and Chad .[143]
From 2012 to 2021, France and other African states intervened in
support of the Malian  government in the Northern Mali conflict .
In 2017, France was the world's fourth-lar gest donor of development aid in absolute terms, behind the United
States, Germany , and the United Kingdom.[144] This represents 0.43% of its GNP , the 12th highest among the
OECD.[145] Aid is provided by the governmental French Development Agency , which finances primarily
humanitarian projects in sub-Saharan Africa ,[146] with an emphasis on "developing infrastructure, access to
health care and education, the implemen tation of appropriate economic policies and the consolidation of the rule
of law and democracy".[146]
The French Armed Forces (Forces armées françaises ) are the military and paramilitary forces of France, under
the President of the Republic  as supreme commander . They consist of the French Army  (Armée de Terre), the
French Navy  (Marine Nationale , formerly called Armée de Mer), the French Air and Space Force  (Armée de
l'Air et de l'Espace ), and the National Gendarmerie  (Gendarmerie nationale ), which serves as both military
police  and civil police in rural areas. Togeth er they are among the largest armed forces in the world  and the
largest in the EU. According to a 2015 study by Crédit Suisse , the French Armed Forces ranked as the world's
sixth-most powerful military , and the second most powerful in Europe.[147] France's annual military expenditure
in 2023 was US$61.3 billion, or 2.1% of its GDP , making it the eighth biggest military spender in the
world .[148] There has been no national conscription  since 1997.[149]
France has been a recognised nuclear state since 1960. It is a party to
both the Comprehensive Nuclear -Test-Ban Treaty  (CTBT)[150] and
the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty . The French nuclear force
(formerly known as "Force de Frappe ") consists of four Triomphant
class submarines equipped with submarine-launched ballistic
missiles . In addition to the submarine fleet, it is estimated that
France has about 60 ASMP  medium-range air-to-ground missiles
with nuclear warheads ;[151] 50 are deployed by the Air and Space
Force using the Mirage 2000N  long-range nuclear strike aircraft,
while around 10 are deployed by the French Navy's Super Étendar d
Modernisé  (SEM)  attack aircraft, which operate from the nuclear -
powered aircraft carrier  Charles de Gaulle  (R91) .
France has major military industries and one of the largest aerospace sectors  in the world.[152] The country has
produced such equipment as the Rafale fighter , the Charles de Gaulle  aircraft carrier , the Exocet  missile and the
Leclerc  tank among others. France is a major arms seller ,[153][154] with most of its arsenal's designs available for
the export market, except for nuclear -powered devices.Military


--- Page 15 ---
The basic principles that the
French Republic must respect
are found in the 1789
Declaration of the Rights of
Man and of the Citizen.One French intelligence unit, the Directorate-General for External Securi ty, is considered to be a component of
the Armed Forces under the authority of the Ministry of Defence. The other , the Directorate-General for Internal
Security  operates under the authority of the Ministry of the Interior .[155] France's cybersecurity capabilities  are
regularly ranked as some of the most robust of any nation in the world.[156][157]
French weapons exported totaled 27 billion euros in 2022, up from 11.7 billion euros the previous year 2021.
Additionally , the UAE alone contributed more than 16 billion euros arms to the French total.[158] Among the
largest French defence companies are Dassault , Thales  and Safran .[159]
France uses a civil legal  system, wherein law arises primarily from written statutes;[82] judges are not to make
law, but merely to interpret it (though the amount of judicial interpretation in certain areas makes it equivalent to
case law in a common law system). Basic principles of the rule of law were laid in the Napoleonic Code  (which
was largely based on royal law codified under King Louis XIV). In agreement with the principles of the
Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, the law should only prohibit actions detrimental to society .
French law is divided into two principal areas: private law and public law.
Private law includes, in particular , civil law and criminal law. Public law
includes, in particular , administrative law and constitutional law. However , in
practical terms, French law comprises three principal areas of law: civil law,
criminal law, and administrative law. Criminal laws can only address the
future and not the past (criminal ex post facto  laws are prohibited).[160] While
administrative law is often a subcategory of civil law in many countries, it is
completely separated in France and each body of law is headed by a specific
supreme court: ordinary courts  (which handle criminal and civil litigation) are
headed by the Court of Cassation  and administrative courts are headed by the
Council of State . To be applicable, every law must be officially published in
the Journal officiel de la République française .
France does not recognise religious law as a motivation for the enactment of
prohibitions; it has long abolished blasphemy  laws and sodomy laws (the
latter in 1791). However , "offences against public decency " (contrair es aux
bonnes mœurs ) or disturbing public order  (trouble à l'ordre public ) have been
used to repress public expressions of homosexuality or street prostitution.
France generally has a positive reputatio n regarding LGBTQ rights .[161] Since 1999, civil unions  for homosexual
couples have been permitted, and since 2013, same-sex marriage  and LGBT  adoption  are legal.[162] Some
consider hate speech laws in France  to be too broad or severe, undermining  freedom of speech .[163] France has
laws against racism and antisemitism ,[164] while the 1990 Gayssot Act prohibits Holocaust denial . In 2024,
France became the first nation in the European Union to explicitly protect abortion  in its constitution .[165]
Freedom of religion  is constitutionally guaranteed by the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the
Citizen . The 1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State  is the basis for laïcité  (state
secularism): the state does not formally  recognise any religion, except in Alsace-Moselle , which continues to
subsidize education and clergy of Catho licism, Lutheranism, Calvinism, and Judaism. Nonetheless, France does
recognise religious associations. The Parliament has listed many religious movements as dangerous cults  since
1995 and has banned wearing conspicuous religious symbols in schools  since 2004. In 2010, it banned the
wearing of face-covering Islamic veils in public ; human rights groups such as Amnesty International  and Human
Rights Watch described the law as discriminatory towards Muslims.[166][167] However , it is supported by most of
the population.[168]Law


--- Page 16 ---
La Défense was in 2017 ranked by Ernst
& Young as the leading central business
district in continental Europe, and the
fourth in the world.[169]France has a social market economy  characterised by sizeable
government involvement  and diversified sectors . For roughly two
centuries, the French economy has consistently ranked  among the ten
largest globally; it is currently the world's ninth largest by purchasing
power parity , the seventh largest by nominal GDP , and the second
largest in the European Union by both metrics.[170] France is
considered a great power  with considerable economic strength ,[171]
being a member of the Group of Seven  leading industrialised
countries , the Organisation for Economic Co-ope ration and
Development  (OECD), and the Group of Twenty  largest economies.
France ranked 12th in the 2024 Global Innovation Index , compared
to 16th in 2019.[172][173]
France's economy is highly diversified; services  represent two-thirds of both the workforce and GDP ,[174] while
the industrial sector  accounts for a fifth of GDP  and a similar proportion of employment. France is the third-
biggest manufacturing country in Europe, behind Germany and Italy, and ranks eighth in the world by
manufacturing output , at 1.9 per cent.[175] Less than 2 per cent of GDP  is gene rated by the primary sector ,
namely agriculture;[176] however , France's agricultural sector is among the largest in value and leads the EU in
overall production.[177]
In 2018, France was the fifth-lar gest trading nation in the world  and the second-lar gest in Europe, with the value
of exports representing over a fifth of GDP.[178] Its membership in the eurozone  and the broader European single
market  facilitates access to capital, goods, services, and skilled labour .[179] Despite protectionist  policies over
certain industries, particularly in agriculture, France has generally played a leading role in fostering free trade
and commercial integration in Europe to enhance its economy .[180][181] In 2019, it ranked first in Europe and
13th in the world in foreign direct investment , with European countries and the United States being leading
sources.[182] According to the Bank of France  (founded in 1800),[183] the leading recipients of FDI were
manufacturing, real estate, finance and insurance.[184] The Paris Region  has the highest concentration of
multinational firms in mainland Europe.[184]
Under the doctrine of Dirigisme , the government historically played a major role in the economy; policies such
as indicative planning  and nationalisation  are credited for contributing to three decades of unprecedented
postwar economic growth known as Trente Glorieuses . At its peak in 1982, the public sector accounted for one-
fifth of industrial employment and over four-fifths of the credit market. Beginning in the late 20th century ,
France loosened regulations and state involvement in the economy , with most leading companies now being
privately owned; state ownership now dominates only transportation, defence and broadcasting.[185] Policies
aimed at promoting economic dynamism and privatisation have improved France's economic standing globally:
it is among the world's 10 most innovative  countries in the 2020 Bloomber g Innovation Index ,[186] and the 15th
most competitive, according to the 2019 Global Competitiveness Report  (up two places from 2018).[187]
The Paris stock exchange (French: La Bourse de Paris ) is one of the oldest in the world, create d in 1724.[188] In
2000, it merged with counterparts in Amsterdam and Brussels to form Euronext ,[189] which in 2007 merged with
the New York stock exchange  to form NYSE Euronext , the world's largest stock exchange.[189] Euronext Paris ,
the French branch of NYSE Euronext, is Europe's second-lar gest stock exchange market. Some examples of the
most valuable French companies include LVMH , L'Oréal  and Sociéte Générale .[190]Economy


--- Page 17 ---
Palace of Versailles, YvelinesFrance has historically been one of the world's major agricultural centres and remains a "global agricultural
powerhouse"; France is the world's sixth -biggest exporter of agricultural products, generating a trade surplus of
over €7.4 billion.[191][192] Nicknamed "the granary of the old continent",[193] over half its total land area is
farmland , of which 45 per cent is devoted to permanent field crops such as cereals. The country's diverse
climate, extensive arable land, modern farming technology , and EU subsidies  have made it Europe's leading
agricultural producer and exporter .[194]
With 100 million international tourist arrivals in 2023,[195] France is
the world's top tourist destination , ahead of Spain (85 million) and
the United States (66 million). However , it ranks third in tourism-
derived income due to the shorter duration of visits.[196] The most
popular tourist sites include (annual visitors): Eiffel Tower
(6.2 million), Château de Versailles  (2.8 million), Muséum national
d'Histoire naturelle  (2 million), Pont du Gard  (1.5 million), Arc de
Triomphe  (1.2 million), Mont Saint-Michel  (1 million), Sainte-
Chapelle  (683,000), Château du Haut-Kœnigsbour g (549,000), Puy
de Dôme  (500,000), Musée Picasso  (441,000), and Carcassonne
(362,000).[197]
France, especially Paris, has some of the world's largest museums, including the Louvre , which is the most
visited art museum in the world  (7.7 million visitors in 2022), the Musée d'Orsay  (3.3 million), mostly devoted
to Impressionism , the Musée de l'Orangerie  (1.02 million), which is home to eight large Water Lily murals by
Claude Monet , as well as the Centre Geor ges Pompidou  (3 million), dedicated to contemporary art. Disneyland
Paris  is Europe's most popular theme park, with 15 million combined visitors to the resort's Disneyland Park and
Walt Disney Studios Park in 2009.[198] With more than 10 million tourists a year, the French Riviera  (French:
Côte d'Azur ), in Southeast France, is the second leading tourist destination in the country , after the Paris
Region .[199] With 6 million tourists a year, the castles of the Loire Valley  (French: châteaux ) and the Loire
Valley  itself are the third leading tourist destination in France.[200][201]
France has 52 sites inscribed in UNESCO's World Heritage List and features cities of high cultural interest,
beaches and seaside resorts, ski resorts, as well as rural regions that many enjoy for their beauty and tranquillity
(green tourism ). Small and picturesque French village s are promoted through the associatio n Les Plus Beaux
Villages de France  (literally "The Most Beautiful Villages of France"). The "Remarkable Gardens " label is a list
of the over 200 gardens classified by the Ministry of Culture . This label is intended to protect and promote
remarkable gardens and parks. France attracts many religious pilgrims  on their way to St. James , or to Lourdes , a
town in the Hautes-Pyrénées  that hosts several million visitors a year .
France is the world's tenth-lar gest producer of electricity .[202] Électricité de France  (EDF), which is majority-
owned by the French government, is the country's main producer and distribu tor of electricity , and one of the
world's largest electric utility companies , ranking third in revenue globally .[203] In 2018, EDF produced roughly
one-fifth of the European Union 's electricity , primarily from nuclear power .[204] In 2021, France was the biggest
energy exporter in Europe, mostly to the UK and Italy,[205] and the largest net exporter of electricity in the
world.[205]Tourism
Energy


--- Page 18 ---
Belleville Nuclear Power Plant. France
derives most of its electricity from nuclear
power, the highest percentage in the
world.
Millau Viaduct is the tallest bridge in the
world.[211]Since the 1973 oil crisis , France has pursued a strong policy of
energy security ,[205] namely through heavy investment in nuclear
energy. It is one of 32 countries with nuclear power plants , ranking
second in the world by the number of operational nuclear reactors , at
56.[206] Consequently , 70% of France's electricity is generated by
nuclear power , the highest proportion in the world by a wide
margin;[207] only Slovakia and Ukraine also derive a majority of
electricity from nuclear power , at roughly 53% and 51%,
respectively .[208] France is considered a world leader in nuclear
technology , with reactors and fuel products being major exports.[205]
France's significant reliance on nuclear power has resulted in
comparatively slower adoption of renewable energy relative to other
Western nations. Nevertheless, betwee n 2008 and 2019, France's
production capacity from renewable energies rose consistently and
nearly doubled.[209] Hydropower  is by far the leading source, accounting  for over half the country's renewable
energy sources[210] and contributing 13% of its electricity ,[209] the highest proportion in Europe after Norway
and Turkey .[210] As with nuclear power , most hydroelectric plants, such as Eguzon , Étang de Soulcem , and Lac
de Vouglans , are managed by EDF .[210] France aims to further expand hydropower into 2040.[209]
France's railway network , which stretches 29,473 kilometres
(18,314 mi) as of 2008,[212] is the second most extensive in Western
Europe after Germany .[213] It is operated by the SNCF , and high-
speed trains include the Thalys , the Eurostar  and TGV , which travels
at 320 km/h (199 mph).[214] The Eurostar , along with the Eurotunnel
Shuttle , connects with the United Kingdom through the Channel
Tunnel . Rail connections exist to all other neighbouring countries in
Europe except Andorra. Intra-urban connections are also well
developed, with most major cities having under ground  or tramway
services complementing bus services.
There are approximately 1,027,183 kilometres (638,262 mi) of
serviceable roadway in France, ranking it the most extensive network of the European continent.[215] The Paris
Region is enveloped with the densest network of roads and highways, which connect it with virtually all parts of
the country . French roads also handle substantial international traffic, connecting with cities in neighbouring
Belgium, Luxembour g, Germany , Switz erland, Italy, Spain, Andorra and Monaco. There is no annual registration
fee or road tax; however , usage of the mostly privately owned motorways is through tolls except in the vicinity
of large communes. The new car market is dominated by domestic brands such as Renault , Peugeot  and
Citroën .[216] France possesses the Millau Viaduct , the world's tallest bridge,[217] and has built many important
bridges such as the Pont de Normandie . Diesel  and petrol -driven cars and lorries cause a large part of the
country's air pollution  and greenhouse gas emissions .[218][219]
There are 464 airports  in France.[82] Charles de Gaulle Airport , located in the vicinity of Paris, is the largest and
busiest airport in the country , handling the vast majority of popular and commercial traffic and connecting Paris
with virtually all major cities across the world. Air France  is the national carrier airline, although numerous
private airline companies provide domestic and international travel services. There are ten major ports in France,Transport


--- Page 19 ---
Population density in France by arrondissementthe largest of which is in Marseille ,[220] which also is the largest bordering the Mediterranean Sea.[221] 12,261
kilometres (7,619 mi) of waterways traverse France including the Canal du Midi , which connects the
Mediterranean Sea to the Atlantic Ocean through the Garonne  river .[82]
With an estimated population of 68,605,616 people,[8][XI]
France is the 20th most populous country in the world , the
third-most populous in Europe (after Russia  and Germany ),
and the second most populous in the European Union  (after
Germany).
For much of the 21st century , France has been an outlier
among developed countries, particularly in Europe, for its
relatively high rate of natural population growth ; by birth
rates alone, it was responsible for almost all natural
population growth  in the European Union in 2006.[222]
Between 2006 and 2016, France saw the second-highest
overall increase in population in the EU and was one of only
four EU countries where natural births accounted for the
most population growth.[223] This was the highest rate since
the end of the baby boom  in 1973 and coincides with the rise
in the total fertility rate  from a nadir of 1.7 in 1994 to 2.0 in 2010.
Since 2011, France's fertility rate has been steadily declining;[224] it stood at 1.79 per woman in 2023,[225] below
the replacement rate of 2.1 and well below the high of 4.41 in 1800.[226][227][228] France's fertility rate and crude
birth rate nonetheless remain the highest in the EU[229] and among the highest in Europe overall, where the
average is 1.5.[230] The mean age of French women at the birth of their first child was 29.1, slightly younger
than the EU average of 29.7.[229]
Like many developed nations, the French population is aging : The average age is 41.7 years, while roughly one-
fifth of French people are 65 or over.[231] It is projected that one in three French will be over 60 by 2024. Life
expectancy at birth is 82.7 years, the 12th highest in the world ; French Polynesia and the French region of
Réunion ranked fourth and 1 1th in life expectancy , at 84.07 years and 83.55, respectively .
From 2006 to 2011, population growth averaged 0.6 percent per year;[232] since 2011, annual growth has been
between 0.4 and 0.5 percent annually ,[233] and France is projected to continue growing until 2044.[234]
Immigrants are major contributors to this trend; in 2010, roughly one in four newborns (27 percent) in
metropolitan France had at least one foreign-born  parent and another 24 percent had at least one parent born
outside Europe (excluding French overseas territories).[235] In 2021, the share of children of foreign-born
mothers was 23 percent.[229]
France is a highly urbanised country , with its largest cities  (in terms of metropolitan area population in 2021[236])
being Paris (13,171,056 inh.), Lyon (2,308,818), Marseille  (1,888,788), Lille  (1,521,660), Toulouse  (1,490,640),
Bordeaux  (1,393,764), Nantes  (1,031,953), Strasbour g (864,993), Montpellier  (823,120), and Rennes  (771,320).
(Note: since its 2020 revision of metropolitan area borders, INSEE  considers that Nice  is a metropolitan area
separate from the Cannes -Antibes  metropolitan area; these two combined would have a population of 1,019,905,
as of the 2021 census). Rural flight  was a perennial political issue throughout most of the 20th century .Demographics
Major cities


--- Page 20 ---
 Largest metropolitan areas in France
2021 census
RankName Region Pop.RankName Region Pop.
Paris
Lyon1ParisÎle-de-
France13,171,056 1 1GrenobleAuvergne-
Rhône-
Alpes722,904
Marseille
Lille2LyonAuvergne-
Rhône-
Alpes2,308,818 1 2Rouen Normandy709,065
3MarseilleProvence-
Alpes-
Côte
d'Azur1,888,788 1 3NiceProvence-
Alpes-
Côte
d'Azur626,218
4LilleHauts-de-
France1,521,660 1 4ToulonProvence-
Alpes-
Côte
d'Azur581,948
5ToulouseOccitania1,490,640 1 5ToursCentre-
Val de
Loire522,597
6BordeauxNouvelle-
Aquitaine1,393,764 1 6Nancy Grand Est508,793
7NantesPays de
la Loire1,031,953 1 7Clermont-
FerrandAuvergne-
Rhône-
Alpes508,699
8StrasbourgGrand Est864,993 1 8Saint-
ÉtienneAuvergne-
Rhône-
Alpes500,562
9MontpellierOccitania 823,120 1 9Caen Normandy478,105
1 0Rennes Brittany 771,320 2 0OrléansCentre-
Val de
Loire456,452
Historically , French people were mainly of Celtic -Gallic  origin, with a significant admixture of Italic  (Romans )
and Germanic  (Franks ) groups reflecting centuries of respec tive migration and settlement.[237] Through the
course of the Middle Ages , France incorporated various neighbouring ethnic and linguistic groups, as evidenced
by Breton  elements in the west, Aquitanian  in the southwest, Scandinavian  in the northwest, Alemannic  in the
northeast, and Ligurian  in the southeast.
Large-scale immigration over the last century and a half have led to a more multicultural society; beginning with
the French Revolution and further codified in the French Constitution of 1958 , the government is prohibited
from collecting data on ethnicity and ancestry; most demographic information is drawn from private sector
organisations or academic institutions.  In 2004, the Institut Montaigne  estimated that within Metropolitan
France, 51 million people were White (85% of the population), 6 million were Northwest African (10%), 2
million were Black (3.3%), and 1 million were Asian (1.7%).[238][239]
A 2008 poll conducted jointly by the nstitut national d'études démographiques  and the French National Institute
of Statistics[240][241] estimated that the largest minority ancestry groups were Italian  (5 million), followed by
Northwest African  (3–6 million),[242][243][244] Sub-Saharan African  (2.5 million), Armenian (500,000), and
Turkish (200,000).[245] There are also sizeable minorities of other European ethnic groups , namely Spanish ,
Portuguese , Polish , and Greek .[242][246][247] France has a significant Gitan (Romani)  population, numbering
between 20,000 and 400,000;[248] many foreign Roma  are expelled back to Bulgaria and Romania
frequently .[249]Ethnic groups


--- Page 21 ---
The Calais Jungle was a refugee and
illegal migrant encampment in the vicinity
of Calais, France, that existed from
January 2015 to October 2016.It is currently estimated that 40% of the French population is descended at least partially from the different
waves of immigration since the early 20th century;[250] between 1921 and 1935 alone, about 1.1 million net
immigrants came to France.[251] The next largest wave came in the 1960s when around 1.6 million pieds noirs
returned to France following the independence of its Northwest African possessions, Algeria and
Morocco.[252][253] They were joined by numerous former colonial subjects from North and West Africa, as well
as numerous European immigrants from Spain and Portugal.
France remains a major destination for immigrants, accepting about
200,000 legal immigrants annually .[254] In 2005, it was Western
Europe's leading recipient of asylum  seekers, with an estimated
50,000 applications (albeit a 15% decrease from 2004).[255] In 2010,
France received about 48,100 asylum applications—placing it among
the top five asylum recipients in the world.[256] In subsequent years
it saw the number of applications increase, ultimately doubling to
100,412 in 2017.[257] The European Union allows free movement
between the member states, although France established controls to
curb Eastern European  migration.  Foreigners' rights are established
in the Code of Entry and Residence of Foreigners and of the Right to
Asylum . Immigration remains a contentious political issue.[258]
In 2008, the INSEE  (National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies) estimated that the total number of
foreign-born immigrants was around 5 million (8% of the population), while  their French-born descendants
numbered 6.5 million, or 11% of the population. Thus, nearly a fifth of the coun try's population were either first
or second-generation immigrants, of which more than 5 million were of European origin and 4 million of
Maghrebi  ancestry .[259][260][261] In 2008, France granted citizenship  to 137,000 persons, mostly from Morocco,
Algeria and Turkey .[262] In 2022, more than 320,000 migrants came to France, with the majority coming from
Africa .[263]
In 2014, the INSEE reported a significant increase in the number of immigrants coming from Spain, Portugal
and Italy between 2009 and 2012. According to the institute, this increase resulted from the 2008 financial
crisis .[264] Statistics on Spanish immigrants in France show a growth of 107 per cent between 2009 and 2012,
with the population growing from 5,300  to 11,000.[264] Of the total of 229,000 foreigners coming to France in
2012, nearly 8% were Portuguese, 5% British, 5% Spanish, 4% Italian, 4% German, 3% Romanian, and 3%
Belgian.[264]
The official language of France is French,[265] a Romance language  derived from Latin . Since 1635, the
Académie française  has been France's official authority on the French language, although its recommendations
carry no legal weight. There are also regional languages spoken in France, such as Occitan , Breton , Catalan ,
Flemish  (Dutch  dialect), Alsatian  (German dialect), Basque , and Corsican  (Italian dialect). Italian was the
official language of Corsica until 9 May 1859.[266] Although regional languages do not have the status of official
languages, they are recognized by the Article 75-1 of the French constitution  as part of France's heritage.[267]
The government of France does not regulate the choice of language in publications by individuals, but the use of
French is required by law in commercial and workplace communications. In addition to mandating the use of
French in the territory of the Republic, the French government tries to promote French in the European UnionImmigration
Language


--- Page 22 ---
Map of the Francophone world:
  Native language
  Administrative language
  Secondary or cultural language
Notre-Dame de Reims is the
Roman Catholic cathedral
where the Kings of France
were crowned until 1825.[XII]and globally through institutions such as the
Organisation internationale de la Francophonie .
Besides French, there exist 77 vernacular
minority languages of France, eight spoken in
French metropolitan territory and 69 in the
French overseas territories .
According to the 2007 Adult Education survey ,
part of a project by the European Union  and
carried out in France by the INSEE  and based on
a sample of 15,350 persons, French was the
native language of 87.2% of the total population,
or roughly 55.81 million people, followed by
Arabic (3.6%, 2.3 million), Portuguese (1.5%,
960,000), Spanish (1.2%, 770,000) and Italian
(1.0%, 640,000). Native speakers of other
languages made up the remaining 5.2% of the population.[268]
France is a secular country in which freedom of religion  is a constitutional
right. The French policy on religion is based on the concept of laïcité , a strict
separation of church and state under which the government and public life are
kept completely secular , detached from any religion. The region of Alsace  and
Moselle , which was part of the German Empire  when state secularism was
established in France, is an exception to the general French norm since the
local law stipulates official status and state funding for Lutheranism ,
Catholicism , and Judaism .[269]
Catholicism  has been the main religion in France for more than a millennium,
and it was once the country's state religion .[270] Its role nowadays has been
greatly reduced; nevertheless, in 2012, among the 47,000 religious buildings
in France 94% were Catholic churches.[271] After alternating between royal
and secular republican governments during the 19th century , in 1905 France
passed the 1905 law on the Separation of the Churches and the State , which
established the aforementioned principle of laïcité .[272]
The government is prohibited from recognising specific rights to any religious
community (with the exception of legacy statutes like those of military
chaplains and the aforementioned local law in Alsace-Moselle). It recognises
religious organisations according to formal legal criteria that do not address religious doctrine, and religious
organisations are expected to refrain from intervening in policymaking.[273] Some religious groups, such as
Scientology , the Children of God, the Unification Church , and the Order of the Solar Temple , are considered
cults  (sectes  in French, which is considered a pejorative term[274]) and are not granted the same status as
recognised religions.[275]Religion


--- Page 23 ---
The Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, a teaching
hospital in Paris, is one of Europe's
largest hospitals.[276]
The ENS produces among the
most Nobel Prize laureates per
capita in the world.[286]The French health care system  is one of universal health care largely
financed by government national health insurance . In its 2000
assessment of world health care systems, the World Health
Organization  found that France provided the "close to best overall
health care" in the world.[277] The French health care system was
ranked first worldwide by the World Health Organization in
1997.[278][279] In 2011, France spent 11.6% of its GDP  on health
care, or US$4,086 per capita,[280] a figure much higher than the
average spent by countries in Europe. Approximately 77% of health
expenditures are covered by government-funded agencies.[281]
Care is generally free for people affected by chronic diseases  such as cancer , AIDS or cystic fibrosis . The life
expectancy at birth is 78 years for men and 85 years for women.[282][283] There are 3.22 physicians for every
1000 inhabitants,[284] and average health care spending per capita was US$4,719 in 2008.[285] As of 2007 ,
approximately 140,000 inhabitants (0.4%) of France are living with HIV/AIDS.[82]
In 1802, Napoleon  created the lycée , the second and final stage of secondar y
education that prepares students for higher education studies or a
profession.[287] Jules Ferry  is considered the father of the Frenc h modern
school, leading reforms in the late 19th century that established free, secular
and compulsory education (currently mandatory until the age of 16).[288][289]
French education is centralised and divided into three stages: primary ,
secondary , and higher education. The Programme for International Student
Assessment , coordinated by the OECD , ranked France's education as near the
OECD average in 2018.[290][291] Schoolchildren in France reported greater
concern about the disciplinary climate and behaviour in classrooms compared
to other OECD  countries.[291]
Higher education is divided between public universities  and the prestigious
and selective Grandes écoles , such as Sciences Po Paris  for political studies,
HEC Paris  for economics, Polytechnique , the École des hautes études en
sciences sociales  for social studies and the École nationale supérieure des
mines de Paris  that produce high-profile engineers, or the École nationale d'administration  for careers in the
Grands Corps  of the state. The Grandes écoles  have been criticised for alleged elitism , producing many if not
most of France's high-ranking civil servants, CEOs and politicians.[292]
The origins of French art were very much influenced by Flemish art and by Italian art at the time of the
Renaissance . Jean Fouquet , the most famous medieval French painter , is said to have been the first to travel to
Italy and experience the Early Renaiss ance firsthand. The Renaissance painting School of Fontainebleau  wasHealth
Education
Cultur e
Art


--- Page 24 ---
Claude Monet, founder of the
Impressionist movementdirectly inspired by Italian painters such as Primaticcio  and Rosso Fiorentino ,
who both worked in France. Two of the most famous French artists of the time
of the Baroque era , Nicolas Poussin  and Claude Lorrain , lived in Italy .
French artists developed the rococo  style in the 18th century , as a more
intimate imitation of the old baroque style, the works of the court-endorsed
artists Antoine Watteau , François Boucher  and Jean-Honoré Fragonard  being
the most representative in the country . The French Revolution brought great
changes, as Napoleon  favoured artists of neoclassic style  such as Jacques-
Louis David  and the highly influential Académie des Beaux-Arts  defined the
style known as Academism .
In the second part of the 19th century , France's influence over painting grew ,
with the development of new styles of painting such as Impressionism  and
Symbolism . The most famous impressionist painters of the period were
Camille Pissarro , Édouard Manet , Edgar Degas , Claude Monet  and Auguste
Renoir .[293] The second generation of impressionist-style painters, Paul
Cézanne , Paul Gauguin , Toulouse-Lautrec  and Geor ges Seurat , were also at the avant-garde of artistic
evolutions,[294] as well as the fauvist  artists Henri Matisse , André Derain  and Maurice de Vlaminck .[295][296]
At the beginning of the 20th century , Cubism was developed by Geor ges Braque  and the Spanish painter Pablo
Picasso , living in Paris. Other foreign artists also settled and worked in or near Paris, such as Vincent van Gogh ,
Marc Chagall , Amedeo Modigliani  and Wassily Kandinsky .
There are many art museums in France, the most famous of which being the state-owned Musée du Louvre ,
which collects artwork from the 18th century and earlier . The Musée d'Orsay  was inaugurated in 1986 in the old
railway station Gare d'Orsay , in a major reorganisation of national art collections, to gather French paintings
from the second part of the 19th century  (mainly Impressionism and Fauvism movements).[297][298] It was voted
the best museum in the world in 2018.[299] Modern works are presented in the Musée National d'Art Moderne ,
which moved in 1976 to the Centre Geor ges Pompidou . These three state-owned museums are visited by close to
17 million people a year .[300]
During the Middle Ages, many fortified  castles were built by feudal nobles to mark their powers. Some French
castles that survived are Chinon , Château d'Angers , the massive Château de Vincennes  and the so-called Cathar
castles . During this era, France had been using Romanesque architecture  like most of Western Europe.
Gothic architecture , originally named Opus Francigenum  meaning "French work",[301] was born in Île-de-
France  and was the first French style of architecture to be imitated throughout Europe.[302] Northern France is
the home of some of the most importan t Gothic cathedrals and basilicas, the first of these being the Saint Denis
Basilica  (used as the royal necropolis); other important French Gothic cathedrals are Notre-Dame de Chartres
and Notre-Dame d'Amiens . The kings were crowned in another important Gothic church: Notre-Dame de
Reims .[303]
The final victory in the Hundred Years' War marked an important stage in the evolution of French architecture. It
was the time of the French Renaissance  and several artists from Italy were invited to the French court; many
residential palaces were built in the Loire Valley , from 1450 as a first reference the Château de Montsoreau .[304]
Examples of such residential castles include the Château de Chambord , the Château de Chenonceau , or the
Château d'Amboise .Architecture


--- Page 25 ---
Saint Louis's Sainte-Chapelle
represents the French impact
on religious architecture.Following the Renaissance and the end of the Middle Ages, Baroque
architecture  replaced the traditional Gothic style. However , in France,
Baroque architecture found greater success in the secular domain than in the
religious one.[305] In the secular domain, the Palace of Versailles  has many
Baroque features. Jules Hardouin Mansart , who designed the extensions to
Versailles, was one of the most influential French architects of the Baroque
era; he is famous for his dome at Les Invalides .[306] Some of the most
impressive provincial Baroque architectu re is found in places that were not yet
French such as Place Stanislas  in Nancy . On the military architectural side,
Vauban  designed some of the most efficient fortresses in Europe and became
an influential military architect; as a result, imitations of his works can be
found all over Europe, the Americas, Russia and Turkey .[307][308]
After the Revolution, the Republicans  favoured Neoclassicism  although it was
introduced in France before the revolution with such buildings as the Parisian
Pantheon  or the Capitole de Toulouse . Built during the first French Empire,
the Arc de Triomphe  and Sainte Marie-Madeleine  represent the best example
of Empire-style  architecture.[309] Under Napoleon III, a new wave of
urbanism and architecture was given birth; extravagant buildings such as the
neo-Baroque Palais Garnier  were built. The urban planning of the time was
very organised and rigorous; most notably, Haussmann's renovation of Paris .
The architecture associated with this era is named Second Empire  in English,
the term being taken from the Second French Empire . At this time there was a
strong Gothic resur gence across Europe and in France; the associated architect was Eugène Viollet-le-Duc . In the
late 19th century , Gustave Eiffel designed many bridges, such as the Garabit viaduct , and remains one of the
most influential bridge designers of his time, although he is best remembered for the Eiffel Tower .
In the 20th century , French-Swiss architect Le Corbusier  designed several buildings in France. More recently ,
French architects have combined both modern and old architectural styles. The Louvre Pyramid  is an example of
modern architecture added to an older building. The most difficult buildings to integrate within French cities are
skyscrapers, as they are visible from afar. For instance, in Paris, since 1977, new buildings had to be under 37
metres (121 ft).[310] France's largest financial district is La Défense , where a significant number of skyscra pers
are located.[311] Other massive buildings that are a challenge to integrate into their environment are large
bridges; an example of the way this has been done is the Millau Viaduct . Some famous modern French architects
include Jean Nouvel , Dominique Perrault , Christian de Portzamparc  and Paul Andreu .
The earliest French literature dates from the Middle Ages  when what is now known as modern France did not
have a single, uniform language. There were several languages and dialects, and writers used their own spelling
and grammar . Some authors of Frenc h medieval texts, such as Tristan and Iseult  and Lancelot-Grail  are
unknown. Three famous medieval authors are Chrétien de Troyes , Christine de Pizan  (langue d'oïl), and Duke
William IX of Aquitaine  (langue d'oc). Much medieval French poetry and literature was inspired by the legends
of the Carolingian cycle , such as the Song of Roland  and the chansons de geste . The Roman de Renart , written in
1175 by Perrout de Saint Cloude, tells the story of the medieval character Reynard  ('the Fox') and is another
example of early French writing. An important 16th-century writer was François Rabelais , who wrote five
popular early picaresque  novels. Rabelais was also in regular communication with Marguerite de Navarre , author
of the Heptamer on.[312] Another 16th-century author was Michel de Montaigne , whose most famous work,
Essais , started a literary genre.[313]Literature and philosophy


--- Page 26 ---
Victor Hugo, a French Romantic writer
and politicianFrench literature and poetry flourished during the 18th and 19th
centuries. Denis Diderot  is best known as the main editor of the
Encyclopédie , whose aim was to sum up all the knowledge of his
century and to fight ignorance and obscurantism . During that same
century , Charles Perrault  was a prolific writer of children's fairy tales
including Puss in Boots , Cinder ella, Sleeping Beauty  and Bluebear d.
At the start of the 19th century , symbolist poetry  was an important
movement in French literature, with poets such as Charles
Baudelaire , Paul Verlaine  and Stéphane Mallarmé .[314]
The 19th century saw the writings of many French authors. Victor
Hugo is sometimes seen as "the greatest French writer of all
time"[315] for excelling in all literary genres . Hugo's verse has been
compared to that of Shakespeare, Dante  and Homer .[316] His novel
Les Misérables  is widely seen as one of the greatest novels ever
written[317] and The Hunchback of Notre Dame  has remained
immensely popular . Other major authors of that century include
Alexandre Dumas  (The Three Musketeers  and The Count of Monte-
Cristo ), Jules Verne (Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas),
Émile Zola (Les Rougon-Macquart ), Honoré de Balzac  (La Comédie humaine ), Guy de Maupassant , Théophile
Gautier  and Stendhal  (The Red and the Black , The Charter house of Parma ), whose works are among the most
well known in France and the world.
In the early 20th century France was a haven for literary freedom.[318] Works banned for obscenity in the US, the
UK and other Anglophone nations were published in France decades before they were available in the respective
authors' home countries.[318] The French were disinclined to punish literary figures for their writing, and
prosecutions were rare.[318] Important writers of the 20th century include Marcel Proust , Louis-Ferdinand
Céline , Jean Cocteau , Albert Camus , and Jean-Paul Sartre . Antoine de Saint-Exupéry  wrote The Little Prince ,
which is one of the best selling books in history .[319][320]
Medieval philosophy was dominated by Scholasticism  until the emer gence of Humanism  in the Renaissance.
Modern philosophy  began in France in the 17th century with the philosophy of René Descartes , Blaise Pascal
and Nicolas Malebranche . Descartes was the first Western philosopher  since ancient times to attempt to build a
philosophical system from the ground up rather than building on the work of predecessors.[321][322] France in the
18th century saw major philosophical contributions from Voltaire  who came to embody the Enlightenment and
Jean-Jacques Rousseau  whose work highly influenced the French Revolution.[323][324] French philosophers
made major contributions to the field in the 20th century including the existentialist  works of Simone de
Beauvoir , Camus, and Sartre.[325] Other influential contributions during this time include the moral and political
works of Simone Weil, contributions to structuralism  including from Claude Lévi-Strauss  and the post-
structuralist  works by Michel Foucault .[326][327]
France experienced a golden age in the 17th century thanks to Louis XIV, who employed talented musicians and
composers in the royal court. Compose rs of this period include Marc-Antoine Charpentier , François Couperin ,
Michel-Richard Delalande , Jean-Baptiste Lully  and Marin Marais , all of them composers at the court. After thePhilosophy
Music


--- Page 27 ---
Claude Debussy, a French
composer
A Palme d'Or from the Cannes Film
Festival, one of the "Big Three" film
festivals alongside the Venice Film
Festival and Berlin International Film
Festival[338][339][340]death of the "Roi Soleil", French musical creation lost dynamism, but in the
next century the music of Jean-Philippe Rameau  reached some prestige.
Rameau became the dominant composer of French opera  and the leading
French composer of the harpsichord.[328]
In the field of classical music , France has produced a number of notable
composers such as Gabriel Fauré , Claude Debussy , Maurice Ravel , and Hector
Berlioz . Claude Debussy and Maurice Ravel are the most prominent figures
associated with Impressionist music . The two composers invented new
musical forms[329][330][331][332] and new sounds. Debussy was among the
most influential composers of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and his
use of non-traditional scales and chromaticism  influenced many composers
who followed.[333] His music is noted for its sensory content and frequent
usage of atonality . Erik Satie  was a key member of the early-20th-century
Parisian avant-garde . Francis Poulenc 's best-known works are his piano suite
Trois mouvements perpétuels  (1919), the ballet Les biches  (1923), the Concert
champêtr e (1928) for harpsichord  and orchestra, the opera Dialogues des
Carmélites  (1957) and the Gloria  (1959) for soprano , choir and orchestra. In the middle of the 20th century ,
Maurice Ohana , Pierre Schaef fer and Pierre Boulez  contributed to the evolution of contemporary classical
music .[334]
French music then followed the rapid emer gence of pop and rock music in the middle of the 20th century .
Although English-speaking creations achieved popularity in the country , French pop music , known as chanson
française , has also remained very popular . Among the most important French artists of the century are Édith
Piaf, Geor ges Brassens , Léo Ferré , Charles Aznavour  and Serge Gainsbour g.[335] Modern pop music has seen the
rise of popular French hip hop, French rock, techno /funk, and turntablists /DJs. Although there are very few rock
bands in France compared to English-speaking countries,[336] bands such as Noir Désir , Mano Negra , Niagara ,
Les Rita Mitsouko  and more recently Superbus , Phoenix  and Gojira ,[337] or Shaka Ponk , have reached
worldwide popularity .
France has historical and strong links with cinema , with two
Frenchmen, Auguste and Louis Lumière (known as the Lumière
Brothers ) credited with creating cinema in 1895.[341] The world's
first female filmmaker , Alice Guy-Blaché , was also from France.[342]
Several important cinematic movements, including the late 1950s
and 1960s Nouvelle Vague , began in the country . It is noted for
having a strong film industry , due in part to protections afforded by
the government. France remains a leade r in filmmaking, as of 2015
producing more films than any other European country .[343][344] The
nation also hosts the Cannes Festival , one of the most important and
famous film festivals in the world.[345][346]
Apart from its strong and innovative film tradition, France has also
been a gathering spot for artists from across Europe and the world.
For this reason, French cinema is sometimes intertwined with the
cinema of foreign nations. Directors from nations such as Poland
(Roman Polanski , Krzysztof Kieślowski , Andrzej Żuławski ), Argentina (Gaspar Noé, Edgardo Cozarinsky ),
Russia (Alexandre Alexeief f, Anatole Litvak ), Austria (Michael Haneke ) and Geor gia (Géla Babluani , OtarCinema


--- Page 28 ---
Chanel's headquarters on
Place Vendôme, ParisIosseliani ) are prominent in the ranks of French cinema. Conversely , French directors have had prolific and
influential careers in other countries, such as Luc Besson , Jacques Tourneur  or Francis Veber in the United
States . Although the French film market is dominated by Hollywood, France is the only nation in the world
where American films make up the smallest share of total film revenues, at 50%, compared with 77% in
Germany and 69% in Japan.[347] French films account for 35% of the total film revenues of France, which is the
highest percentage of national film revenues in the developed world outside the United States, compared to 14%
in Spain and 8% in the UK.[347] In 2013, France was the second-lar gest exporter of films in the world, after the
United States.[348]
As part of its advocacy of cultural exception , a political concept of treating culture differently from other
commercial products,[349] France succeeded in convincing all EU members to refuse to include culture and
audiovisuals in the list of liberalised sectors of the WTO in 1993.[350] This decision was confirmed in a vote by
UNESCO  in 2005.[351]
Fashion has been an important industry and cultural export of France since the
17th century , and modern "haute couture " originated in Paris in the 1860s.
Today , Paris, along with London, Milan,  and New York City, is considered one
of the world's fashion capitals , and the city is home or headquarters to many of
the premier fashion houses. The expression Haute couture is, in France, a
legally protected name, guaranteeing certain quality standards.
The association of France with fashion and style (French: la mode ) dates
largely to the reign of Louis XIV.[352] France renewed its dominance of the
high fashion (French: coutur e or haute coutur e) industry in the years 1860–
1960 through the establishment of the great couturier  houses such as Chanel ,
Dior, and Givenchy . The French perfume industry is the world leader in its
sector and is centred on the town of Grasse .[353]
According to 2017 data compiled by Deloitte , Louis Vuitton Moet Hennessey
(LVMH), a French brand, is the largest luxury company in the world by sales,
selling more than twice the amount of its nearest competitor .[354] Moreover , France also possesses 3 of the top
10 luxury goods companies by sales (LVMH , Kering SA, L'Oréal ), more than any other country in the
world.[354]
In 2021, regional daily newspapers, such as Ouest-France , Sud Ouest , La Voix du Nord, Dauphiné Libéré , Le
Télégramme , and Le Progrès , more than doubled the sales of national newspapers, such as Le Monde , Le Figar o,
L'Équipe  (sports), Le Parisien , and Les Echos  (finance). Free dailies, distributed in metropolitan centres,
continue to increase their market share.[356] The sector of weekly magazines includes more than 400 specialised
weekly magazines published in the country .[357]
The most influential news magazines are the left-wing Le Nouvel Observateur , centrist L'Expr ess and right-wing
Le Point  (in 2009 more than 400,000 copies),[358] but the highest circulation numbers for weeklies are attained
by TV magazines and by women's magazines, among them Marie Clair e and ELLE , which have foreign
versions. Influential weeklies also include investigative and satirical papers Le Canar d Enchaîné  and Charlie
Hebdo , as well as Paris Match . As in most industrialised nations, the print media have been affected by a severe
crisis  with the rise of the internet. In 2008, the government launched a major initiative to help the sector reform
and become financially independent,[359][360] but in 2009 it had to give €600,000 to help the print media copeFashion
Media


--- Page 29 ---
Le Figaro was founded in 1826 and it is
still considered a newspaper of
record.[355]
French wines are usually made to
accompany French cuisine.
Starting in 1903, the Tour de France is
the most prestigious of Grands Tours,
and the world's most famous cycling
race.[373]with the 2008 financial crisis , in addition to existing subsidies.[361]
In 1974, after years of centralised monopoly on radio and television,
the governmental agency ORTF was split into several national
institutions, but the three already-existing TV channels and four
national radio stations[362][363] remained under state control. It was
only in 1981 that the government allowed free broadcasting in the
territory .[363]
Different regions have different styles. In the north, butter and cream
are common ingredients, whereas olive oil is more commonly used
in the south.[364] Each region of France has traditional specialties:
cassoulet  in the southwest, choucroute  in Alsace, quiche  in the
Lorraine region , beef bourguignon  in Burgundy , Provençal  tapenade ,
etc. France is most famous for its wines[365] and cheeses , which are
often named for the territory where they are produced
(AOC ).[366][367] A meal typically consists of three courses, entrée
('starter'), plat principal  ('main course'), and fromage  ('cheese') or
dessert , sometimes with a salad served before the cheese or dessert.
French cuisine is also regarded as a key element of the quality of life
and the attractiveness of France. A French publication, the Michelin
Guide , awards Michelin stars  for excellence to a select few
establishments.[368][369] The acquisition or loss of a star can have
dramatic effects on the success of a restaurant. By 2006, the Michelin
Guide  had awarded 620 stars to French restaurants.[370]
In addition to its wine tradition, France is also a major producer of
beer and rum. The three main French brewing regions are Alsace
(60% of national production), Nord-Pas-de-Calais, and Lorraine.
French rum is made in distilleries on islands in the Atlantic and
Indian oceans.[371][372]
France hosts "the world's biggest annual sporting event", the annual
cycling race Tour de France .[374] Other popular sports played in
France include football , judo, tennis ,[375] rugby union[376] and
pétanque . France has hosted events such as the 1938  and 1998 FIFA
World Cups ,[377] the 2007 Rugby World Cup,[378] and the 2023
Rugby World Cup.[379] The country also hosted the 1960 European
Nations' Cup, UEFA Euro 1984 , UEFA Euro 2016  and 2019 FIFA
Women's World Cup. The Stade de France  in Saint-Denis  is France's
largest stadium and was the venue for the 1998 FIFA World Cup and
2007 Rugby World Cup finals. Since 1923, France is famous for its
24 Hours of Le Mans  sports car endurance race.[380] Several major
tennis tournaments take place in France, including the Paris Masters
and the French Open , one of the four Grand Slam  tournaments.
French martial arts  include Savate  and Fencing .Cuisine
Sports


--- Page 30 ---
Zidane is regarded as one of
the greatest footballers of all
time.France has a close association with the Modern Olympic Games ; it was a
French aristocrat, Baron Pierre de Coubertin , who suggested the Games' revival,
at the end of the 19th century .[381][382] Paris hosted the second Games in
1900 ,[383] and has hosted the Olympics on five further occasions: the 1924
Summer Olympics , the 2024 Summer Olympics  both in Paris[382] and three
Winter Games  (1924  in Chamonix , 1968  in Grenoble  and 1992  in
Albertville ).[382] France introduced Olympics for deaf people (Deaflympics) in
1924 .[384]
Both the national football team  and the national rugby union team  are
nicknamed "Les Bleus ". Football is the most popular sport in France, with over
1,800,000 registered players and over 18,000 registered clubs.[385]
The French Open, also called Roland-G arros, is a major tennis  tournament held
over two weeks between late May and early June at the Stade Roland-Garros  in
Paris. It is the premier clay court tennis championship event in the world and
the second of four annual Grand Slam  tournaments.[386]
Rugby union  is popular , particularly in Paris and the southwest of France.[387] The national rugby union team
has competed at every Rugby World Cup ; it takes part in the annual Six Nations Championship .
France portal
Europe portal
Outline of France
I. The current Constitution of France  does not specify a national emblem.[1] The lictor's fasces  is very
often used to represent the French Republic, although it holds no of ficial status.[2] In addition to the
coat of arms, France also uses a different emblem  for diplomatic and consular purposes.
II. For information about regional languages, see Languages of France .
III. French Land Register  data, which exclude lakes, ponds and glaciers  larger than 1 km2 (0.386 sq
mi or 247 acres) as well as the estuaries of rivers
IV. Whole of the except the overseas territories in the Pacific Ocean
V. French overseas territories in the Pacific Ocean only
VI. Various other time zones are used in overseas France, from UTC−10 ( French Polynesia ) to
UTC+12 ( Wallis and Futana ). For further information, view Time in France .
VII. The overseas regions and collectivities form part of the French telephone numbering plan , but
have their own country calling codes: Guadeloupe  +590; Martinique  +596; French Guiana  +594;
Réunion  and Mayotte  +262; Saint Pierre and Miquelon  +508. The overseas territories are not part
of the French telephone numbering plan; their country calling codes are: New Caledonia  +687;
French Polynesia  +689; Wallis and Futuna  +681.
VIII. In addition to .fr, several other Internet TLDs are used in French overseas départements  and
territories: .re, .mq, .gp, .tf, .nc, .pf, .wf, .pm, .gf and .yt. The .cat domain is used in Catalan-
speaking territories , .eus in Basque-speaking territories  and .bzh in Brittany .
IX. French:  [f ʁ ɑ ̃s] ⓘSee also
Notes


--- Page 31 ---
X. French: République française  French:  [ ʁepyblik  f ʁ ɑ ̃s ɛ ː z] ⓘ
XI. As of January 2025
XII. The last sacre  was that of Charles X  on 29 May 1825.
1. Article II of the Constitution of France  (1958)
2. "THE LICT OR'S F ASCES"  (https://www .elysee.fr/en/french-presidency/the-lictor-s-fasces) . 15
December 2022. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20240407081203/https://www .elysee.fr/en/
french-presidency/the-lictor-s-fasces)  from the original on 7 April 2024 . Retrieved 18 May  2024 .
3. "L'essentiel sur ... les immigrés et les étrangers"  (https://www .insee.fr/fr/statistiques/3633212) .
Insee . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20190626142004/https://www .insee.fr/fr/statistiques/3
633212)  from the original on 26 June 2019 . Retrieved 9 September  2023 .
4. "Etat des lieux de la laïcité en France – 2021"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20240118103656/http
s://www .gouvernement.fr/sites/default/files/contenu/piece-jointe/2021/02/etat_des_lieux_de_la_laic
ite_en_france._viavoice_-_observatoire_de_la_laicite._2021.pdf)  (PDF)  (official statistics) (in
French). Observatoire de la laïcité, Government of France . p. 37. Archived from the original  (http
s://www .gouvernement.fr/sites/default/files/contenu/piece-jointe/2021/02/etat_des_lieux_de_la_laic
ite_en_france._viavoice_-_observatoire_de_la_laicite._2021.pdf)  (PDF)  on 18 January 2024.
5. "Surface water and surface water change"  (https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=SURF
ACE_W ATER) . Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Archived  (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20210324133453/https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=SURF
ACE_W ATER)  from the original on 24 March 2021 . Retrieved 11 October  2020 .
6. "Comparateur de territoires: France entière et France métropolitaine [Superficie en 2021, en km²]"
(https://www .insee.fr/fr/statistiques/1405599?geo=FE-1+METRO-1) . www .insee.fr  (in French).
INSEE . 9 January 2025 . Retrieved 25 January  2025 .
7. "Les collectivités locales en chif fres (2024): 9.2 – France (633,109 km²); France Métropolitaine
(543,941 km²); Outre-Mer (89,168 km²) [pg.128]"  (https://www .collectivites-locales.gouv .fr/files/Acc
ueil/DESL/2024/Collectivit%C3%A9s%20locales%20en%20chif fres%202024/BA T2web-CL_en_chi
ffres_2024.pdf)  (PDF) . www .collectivites-locales.gouv .fr (in French). Direction Générale des
Collectivités Locales  (DGCL). 2025 . Retrieved 25 January  2025 .
8. "Estimation de la population au 1 ᵉ ʳ  Janvier 2025 - Séries par région, département, sexe et âge"  (htt
ps://www .insee.fr/fr/statistiques/8331297) . www .insee.fr  (in French). INSEE . 14 January 2025 .
Retrieved 26 January  2025 .
9. "World Economic Outlook Database, October 2024 Edition. (France)"  (https://www .imf.org/en/Publi
cations/WEO/weo-database/2024/October/weo-report?c=132,&s=NGDPD,PPPGDP ,NGDPDPC,P
PPPC,&sy=2022&ey=2029&ssm=0&scsm=1&scc=0&ssd=1&ssc=0&sic=0&sort=country&ds=.&br
=1). www .imf.org . International Monetary Fund . 22 October 2024 . Retrieved 22 October  2024 .
10. "Gini coef ficient of equivalised disposable income – EU-SILC survey"  (https://ec.europa.eu/eurosta
t/databrowser/view/tessi190/default/table?lang=en) . ec.europa.eu . Eurostat . Archived  (https://web.
archive.org/web/20201009091832/https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/tessi190/defaul
t/table?lang=en)  from the original on 9 October 2020 . Retrieved 25 November  2023 .
11. "Human Development Report 2023/24"  (https://hdr .undp.org/system/files/documents/global-report-
document/hdr2023-24reporten.pdf)  (PDF) . United Nations Development Programme . 13 March
2024. p. 288. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20240313164319/https://hdr .undp.org/system/f
iles/documents/global-report-document/hdr2023-24reporten.pdf)  (PDF)  from the original on 13
March 2024 . Retrieved 13 March  2024 .
12. "List of left- & right-driving countries"  (https://www .worldstandards.eu/cars/list-of-left-driving-countri
es/). WorldStandards .
13. "History of France"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110824051936/http://www .discoverfrance.net/F
rance/History/DF_history .shtml) . Discoverfrance.net. Archived from the original  (http://www .discove
rfrance.net/France/History/DF_history .shtml)  on 24 August 2011 . Retrieved 17 July  2011 .
14. Examples: "frank". American Heritage Dictionary . "frank". Webster's Third New International
Dictionary . And so on.Refer ences


--- Page 32 ---
15. "Origin and meaning of Frank"  (https://www .etymonline.com/word/frank) . Online Etymology
Dictionary . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20240515001926/https://www .etymonline.com/w
ord/frank)  from the original on 15 May 2024 . Retrieved 18 May  2024 .
16. Rouche, Michel (1987). "The Early Middle Ages in the W est". In V eyne, Paul (ed.). A History of
Private Life: From Pagan Rome to Byzantium . Belknap Press. p. 425. ISBN  978-0-674-39974-7 .
OCLC  59830199  (https://search.worldcat.org/oclc/59830199) .
17. Tarassuk, Leonid; Blair , Claude (1982). The Complete Encyclopedia of Arms and W eapons: the
most comprehensive reference work ever published on arms and armor from prehistoric times to
the present with over 1,250 illustrations  (https://books.google.com/books?id=UJbyPwAACAAJ) .
Simon & Schuster . p. 186. ISBN  978-0-671-42257-8 . Retrieved 5 July  2011 .
18. Wells, John C. (2008). Longman Pronunciation Dictionary  (3rd ed.). Longman. ISBN  978-1-4058-
8118-0 .; Collins, Beverley; Mees, Inger M. (1990). "The Phonetics of Cardif f English". In Coupland,
Nikolas; Thomas, Alan Richard (eds.). English in W ales: Diversity , Conflict, and Change  (https://bo
oks.google.com/books?id=tPwYt3gVbu4C) . Multilingual Matters Ltd. p. 96. ISBN  978-1-85359-
032-0 .
19. Jean Carpentier (dir .), François Lebrun (dir .), Alain Tranoy , Élisabeth Carpentier et Jean-Marie
Mayeur (préface de Jacques Le Gof f), Histoire de France, Points Seuil, coll. " Histoire ", Paris,
2000 (1re éd. 1987), p. 17. ISBN  978-2-02-010879-9 .
20. Jenkins, C. (2011). "Cro-Magnon Man, Roman Gaul and the Feudal Kingdom". A Brief History of
France  (https://books.google.com/books?id=urOeBAAAQBAJ) . Little, Brown Book Group . p. 6.
ISBN  978-1849018128 . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20230419204039/https://books.goo
gle.com/books?id=urOeBAAAQBAJ)  from the original on 19 April 2023 . Retrieved 19 April 2023 .
21. Carpentier et al.  2000, pp. 20–24.
22. The Cambridge ancient history  (https://books.google.com/books?id=n1TmVvMwmo4C&pg=RA1-P
A754) . Cambridge University Press. 2000. p. 754. ISBN  978-0-521-08691-2 . Retrieved 23 January
2011 .; Claude Orrieux (1999). A history of ancient Greece  (https://books.google.com/books?id=b8
cA8hymT w8C&pg=P A62) . John Wiley & Sons. p. 62. ISBN  978-0-631-20309-4 . Retrieved
23 January  2011 .
23. Carpentier et al.  2000, p. 29.
24. "Cornelius Tacitus, The History , BOOK II, chapter 91"  (https://www .perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?d
oc=Perseus:text:1999.02.0080:book=2:chapter=91) . perseus.tufts.edu . Archived  (https://web.archi
ve.org/web/20240512112050/https://www .perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3
A1999.02.0080%3Abook%3D2%3Achapter%3D91)  from the original on 12 May 2024 . Retrieved
18 May  2024 .
25. Polybius, The Histories, 2.18.19
26. Cornell, The Beginnings of Rome, p. 325
27. "Provence in Stone"  (https://books.google.com/books?id=ZEIEAAAAMBAJ&pg=P A77) . Life. 13
July 1953. p. 77 . Retrieved 23 January  2011 .
28. Carpentier et al.  2000, pp. 44–45.
29. Carpentier et al.  2000, pp. 53–55.
30. Carpentier et al. 2000, pp. 76–77
31. Carpentier et al.  2000, pp. 79–82.
32. Carpentier et al.  2000, p. 81.
33. Carpentier et al.  2000, p. 84.
34. Carpentier et al.  2000, pp. 84–88.
35. "Faith of the Eldest Daughter – Can France retain her Catholic heritage?"  (https://web.archive.org/
web/20110722112834/http://www .wf-f.org/03-1-France.html) . Wf-f.org. Archived from the original
(http://www .wf-f.org/03-1-France.html)  on 22 July 2011 . Retrieved 17 July  2011 .
36. Ray, Michael. "Battle of Tours". Encyclopedia Britannica, 13 Jun. 2019,
https://www .britannica.com/event/Battle-of-T ours-732 . Accessed 10 April 2025


--- Page 33 ---
37. "France"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110206213909/http://berkleycenter .georgetown.edu/resou
rces/countries/france) . Berkley Center for Religion, Peace, and W orld Affairs. Archived from the
original  (http://berkleycenter .georgetown.edu/resources/countries/france)  on 6 February 2011 .
Retrieved 14 December  2011 . See drop-down essay on "Religion and Politics until the French
Revolution"
38. "Treaty of V erdun"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110716063456/http://history .howstuf fworks.com/
european-history/treaty-of-verdun.htm) . History .howstuf fworks.com. 27 February 2008. Archived
from the original  (http://history .howstuf fworks.com/european-history/treaty-of-verdun.htm)  on 16
July 2011 . Retrieved 17 July  2011 .
39. "History of France – The Capetian kings of France: AD 987–1328"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20
110806020426/http://www .historyworld.net/wrldhis/PlainT extHistories.asp?groupid=1008&HistoryI
D=ab03&gtrack=pthc) . Historyworld.net. Archived from the original  (http://www .historyworld.net/wrl
dhis/PlainT extHistories.asp?groupid=1008&HistoryID=ab03&gtrack=pthc)  on 6 August 2011 .
Retrieved 21 July  2011 .
40. Babbitt, Susan M. (1985). Oresme's Livre de Politiques and the France of Charles V  (https://books.
google.com/books?id=JyALAAAAIAAJ&pg=P A39) . American Philosophical Society . p. 39.
ISBN  978-0-871-69751-6 . OL 2874232M  (https://openlibrary .org/books/OL2874232M) . Archived  (ht
tps://web.archive.org/web/20240518175213/https://books.google.com/books?id=JyALAAAAIAAJ&
pg=P A39#v=onepage&q&f=false)  from the original on 18 May 2024 . Retrieved 16 November  2023 .
41. Nadeau, Jean-Benoit ; Barlow , Julie  (2008). The Story of French  (https://books.google.com/books?i
d=JYDOrzMpgGcC&pg=PT34) . St. Martin's Press. pp. 34f f. ISBN  978-1-4299-3240-0 . Archived  (ht
tps://web.archive.org/web/20240518175328/https://books.google.com/books?id=JYDOrzMpgGcC
&pg=PT34#v=onepage&q&f=false)  from the original on 18 May 2024 . Retrieved 16 May  2016 .
42. "Massacre of the Pure"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20080120172908/http://www .time.com/time/m
agazine/article/0,9171,897752-2,00.html) . Time. New York. 28 April 1961. Archived from the
original  (http://www .time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,897752-2,00.html)  on 20 January 2008.
43. Guerard, Albert  (1959). France: A Modern History . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
pp. 100, 101.
44. Templeman, Geof frey (1952). "Edward III and the beginnings of the Hundred Years W ar".
Transactions of the Royal Historical Society . 2: 69–88. doi:10.2307/3678784  (https://doi.org/10.230
7%2F3678784) . ISSN  0080-4401  (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/0080-4401) . JSTOR 3678784
(https://www .jstor .org/stable/3678784) . S2CID  161389883  (https://api.semanticscholar .org/CorpusI
D:161389883) .
45. Le Roy Ladurie, Emmanuel  (1987). The French peasantry , 1450–1660 . University of California
Press. p. 32 (https://archive.org/details/frenchpeasantry10000lero/page/32) . ISBN  978-0-520-
05523-0 .; Turchin, Peter  (2003). Historical dynamics: why states rise and fall . Princeton University
Press. p. 179 (https://books.google.com/books?id=mUoCrTUo-eEC&pg=P A179) . ISBN  978-0-691-
11669-3 .
46. "Massacre of Saint Bartholomew's Day"  (https://www .britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/516821/Mas
sacre-of-Saint-Bartholomews-Day) . Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/we
b/20150504150458/https://www .britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/516821/Massacre-of-Saint-Barth
olomews-Day)  from the original on 4 May 2015 . Retrieved 21 July  2011 .
47. Rex, Richard (2014). Tudors: The Illustrated History  (https://books.google.com/books?id=uSVVBQ
AAQBAJ&pg=PT302) . Amberley Publishing Limited. ISBN  978-1-4456-4403-5 . Archived  (https://w
eb.archive.org/web/20240518175344/https://books.google.com/books?id=uSVVBQAAQBAJ&pg=
PT302#v=onepage&q&f=false)  from the original on 18 May 2024 . Retrieved 6 March  2019  – via
Google Books.
48. Michael Clodfelter , Warfare and armed conflicts: a statistical encyclopedia of casualty and other
figures, 1492–2015  (McFarland, 2017) p.40
49. Tilly, Charles (1985). "W ar making and state making as organized crime," in Bringing the State
Back In, eds P .B. Evans, D. Rueschemeyer , & T. Skocpol. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1985. p. 174.
50. Cécil V idal (May 2021). "Slave trade"  (https://heritage.bnf.fr/france-ameriques/en/slave-trade-articl
e). bnf.fr . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20230124165612/https://heritage.bnf.fr/france-am
eriques/en/slave-trade-article)  from the original on 24 January 2023 . Retrieved 24 January  2023 .


--- Page 34 ---
51. R.R. Palmer; Joel Colton (1978). A History of the Modern World  (https://archive.org/details/historyo
fmodernw00palm)  (5th ed.). p. 161 (https://archive.org/details/historyofmodernw00palm/page/161) .
52. "Language and Diplomacy"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110721070018/http://www .nakedtransl
ations.com/en/2004/language-and-diplomacy/) . Nakedtranslations.com. Archived from the original
on 21 July 2011 . Retrieved 21 July  2011 .
53. Vernon V alentine Palmer (1996). "The Origins and Authors of the Code Noir"  (https://digitalcommo
ns.law .lsu.edu/lalrev/vol56/iss2/5) . Louisiana Law Review . 56 (2). Archived  (https://web.archive.or
g/web/20230124174315/https://digitalcommons.law .lsu.edu/lalrev/vol56/iss2/5/)  from the original
on 24 January 2023 . Retrieved 24 January  2023 .
54. "BBC History: Louis XV (1710–1774)"  (https://www .bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/louis_xv .shtm
l). BBC. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20181017172743/http://www .bbc.co.uk/history/histo
ric_figures/louis_xv .shtml)  from the original on 17 October 2018 . Retrieved 21 July  2011 .;
"Scholarly bibliography by Colin Jones (2002)"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110725101858/htt
p://webspace.qmul.ac.uk/cdhjones/documents/gn_pdf.pdf)  (PDF) . Archived from the original  (http://
webspace.qmul.ac.uk/cdhjones/documents/gn_pdf.pdf)  (PDF)  on 25 July 2011 . Retrieved 21 July
2011 .
55. * Livesey , James (2001). Making Democracy in the French Revolution . Harvard University Press.
p. 19. ISBN  978-0-6740-0624-9 .
56. Fehér , Ferenc (1990). The French Revolution and the Birth of Modernity  (https://archive.org/detail
s/frenchrevolution0000unse_a4w7)  (1992 ed.). University of California Press. pp. 117– 130.
ISBN  978-0-5200-7120-9 .
57. Thackeray , Frank W . (1996). Events that Changed the World in the Nineteenth Century  (https://boo
ks.google.com/books?id=W0ktX_xI1fYC&pg=P A6). Greenwood Publishing. p. 6. ISBN  978-0-313-
29076-3 . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20240518175816/https://books.google.com/book
s?id=W0ktX_xI1fYC&pg=P A6) from the original on 18 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 June  2017 .
58. Blanning, Tim (April 1998). "Napoleon and German identity". History T oday . Vol. 48. London.
59. Kiernan, Ben (2007). Blood and Soil: A World History of Genocide and Extermination from Sparta
to Darfur  (https://archive.org/details/bloodan_kie_2007_00_0326) . Yale University Press. p. 374 (ht
tps://archive.org/details/bloodan_kie_2007_00_0326/page/374) . ISBN  978-0-300-10098-3 .
60. Hargreaves, Alan G., ed. (2005). Memory , Empire, and Postcolonialism: Legacies of French
Colonialism  (https://books.google.com/books?id=UX8aeX_Lbi4C&pg=P A1). Lexington Books. p. 1.
ISBN  978-0-7391-0821-5 .
61. "France's oldest WWI veteran dies"  (http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/7199127.stm) . London:
BBC News. 20 January 2008. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20161028021340/http://news.
bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/7199127.stm)  from the original on 28 October 2016 . Retrieved 13 June
2009 .
62. Spencer C. Tucker , Priscilla Mary Roberts (2005). Encyclopedia Of World W ar I: A Political, Social,
And Military History  (https://books.google.com/books?id=2Y qjfHL yyj8C&pg=PR25)  Archived  (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20240518175903/https://books.google.com/books?id=2Y qjfHL yyj8C&pg=
PR25)  18 May 2024 at the Wayback Machine . ABC-CLIO. ISBN  978-1-85109-420-2 .
63. Crémieux-Brilhac, Jean-Louis (1996). La France libre  (in French). Paris: Gallimard. ISBN  2-07-
073032-8 .
64. "The Danish Center for Holocaust and Genocide Studies"  (https://web.archive.org/web/201404160
61232/http://www .holocaust-education.dk/holocaust/deportationer .asp) . Archived from the original
(http://www .holocaust-education.dk/holocaust/deportationer .asp)  on 16 April 2014. ; "BBC – History
– World W ars: The V ichy Policy on Jewish Deportation"  (https://www .bbc.co.uk/history/worldwars/g
enocide/jewish_deportation_01.shtml) . BBC. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/202401210152
57/https://www .bbc.co.uk/history/worldwars/genocide/jewish_deportation_01.shtml)  from the
original on 21 January 2024 . Retrieved 18 May  2024 .; France, United States Holocaust Memorial
Museum, "France"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20141206075910/http://www .ushmm.org/wlc/en/ar
ticle.php?ModuleId=10005429) . Archived from the original  (http://www .ushmm.org/wlc/en/article.ph
p?ModuleId=10005429)  on 6 December 2014 . Retrieved 16 October  2014 .


--- Page 35 ---
65. Noir sur Blanc: Les premières photos du camp de concentration de Buchenwald après la
libération, "Archived copy"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20141109055804/http://www .ain.fr/upload/d
ocs/application/pdf/2011-05/dp_expo_schwartz_auf_weiss_nantua_2011bd.pdf)  (PDF) . Archived
from the original  (http://www .ain.fr/upload/docs/application/pdf/2011-05/dp_expo_schwartz_auf_we
iss_nantua_2011bd.pdf)  (PDF)  on 9 November 2014 . Retrieved 14 October  2014 . (French)
66. Macqueen, Norrie (2014). Colonialism  (https://books.google.com/books?id=g1YSBAAAQBAJ&pg=
PA131) . Routledge. p. 131. ISBN  978-1-317-86480-6 . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20240
518181347/https://books.google.com/books?id=g1YSBAAAQBAJ&pg=P A131#v=onepage&q&f=fal
se) from the original on 18 May 2024 . Retrieved 18 May  2024 .; Kimmelman, Michael (4 March
2009). "In France, a W ar of Memories Over Memories of W ar" (https://www .nytimes.com/2009/03/0
5/arts/design/05abroad.html) . The New York T imes . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/202305
23090303/https://www .nytimes.com/2009/03/05/arts/design/05abroad.html)  from the original on 23
May 2023 . Retrieved 18 May  2024 .
67. Crozier , Brian; Mansell, Gerard (July 1960). "France and Algeria". International Affairs . 36 (3): 310–
321. doi:10.2307/2610008  (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F2610008) . JSTOR 2610008  (https://www .jst
or.org/stable/2610008) . S2CID  153591784  (https://api.semanticscholar .org/CorpusID:153591784) .
68. "From Fourth to Fifth Republic"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20080523234726/http://seacoast.sun
derland.ac.uk/~os0tmc/contem/fifth.htm) . University of Sunderland . Archived from the original  (http
s://seacoast.sunderland.ac.uk/~os0tmc/contem/fifth.htm)  on 23 May 2008.
69. A New Paradigm of the African State: Fundi wa Afrika . Springer . 2009. p. 75. ; David P  Forsythe
(2009). Encyclopedia of Human Rights . OUP  US. p. 37 (https://books.google.com/books?id=1QbX
90fmCVUC&pg=P A37) . ISBN  978-0-19-533402-9 .; Elizabeth Schmidt (2013). Foreign Intervention
in Africa: From the Cold W ar to the W ar on T error  (https://books.google.com/books?id=VCMgA wA
AQBAJ&pg=P A46) . Cambridge University Press. p. 46. ISBN  978-1-107-31065-0 . Archived  (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20240518181228/https://books.google.com/books?id=VCMgA wAAQBAJ&
pg=P A46#v=onepage&q&f=false)  from the original on 18 May 2024 . Retrieved 18 May  2024 .
70. Cutts, M.; Of fice of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (2000). The State of the
World's Refugees, 2000: Fifty Years of Humanitarian Action  (https://books.google.com/books?id=5
4Oe1WTfBfAC&pg=P A38) . Oxford University Press. p. 38. ISBN  978-0199241040 . Retrieved
13 January  2017 . Referring to Evans, Martin. 2012. Algeria: France's Undeclared W ar. New York:
Oxford University Press.
71. Julian Bourg, From revolution to ethics: May 1968 and contemporary French thought  (McGill-
Queen's Press-MQUP , 2017).
72. "Europa Of ficial Site – France"  (http://europa.eu/about-eu/countries/member-countries/france/inde
x_en.htm) . EU. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20141022022133/http://europa.eu/about-eu/
countries/member-countries/france/index_en.htm)  from the original on 22 October 2014 . Retrieved
28 October  2014 .
73. "Declaration by the Franco-German Defense and Security Council"  (https://web.archive.org/web/2
0051025215249/http://www .elysee.fr/elysee/anglais/speeches_and_documents/2004/declaration_
by_the_franco-german_defence_and_security_council.1096.html) . Elysee.fr . Archived from the
original  (http://www .elysee.fr/elysee/anglais/speeches_and_documents/2004/declaration_by_the_f
ranco-german_defence_and_security_council.1096.html)  on 25 October 2005 . Retrieved 21 July
2011 .
74. "France and NA TO" (https://web.archive.org/web/20140509044211/http://www .rpfrance-otan.org/Fr
ance-and-NA TO). La France à l'Otan . Archived from the original  (http://www .rpfrance-otan.org/Fran
ce-and-NA TO) on 9 May 2014.
75. Marie-Christine W eidmann-Koop, Rosalie V ermette, "France at the dawn of the twenty-first
century , trends and transformations", p. 160  (https://books.google.com/books?id=cV a46Q7oMlcC&
pg=P A160)
76. Yvonne Yazbeck Haddad and Michael J. Balz, "The October Riots in France: A Failed Immigration
Policy or the Empire Strikes Back?" International Migration  (2006) 44#2 pp. 23–34.
77. Zappi, Sylvia. "French Government Revives Assimilation Policy"  (https://web.archive.org/web/2015
0130222428/http://www .migrationpolicy .org/article/french-government-revives-assimilation-policy) .
Migration Policy Institute. Archived from the original  (http://www .migrationpolicy .org/article/french-g
overnment-revives-assimilation-policy)  on 30 January 2015 . Retrieved 30 January  2015 .


--- Page 36 ---
78. Hinnant, Lori; Adamson, Thomas (11 January 2015). "Officials: Paris Unity Rally Largest in French
History"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20150111213526/http://hosted.ap.org/dynamic/stories/E/EU_
FRANCE_A TTACKS_RALL Y?SITE=AP&SECTION=HOME&TEMPLA TE=DEF AULT&CTIME=2015
-01-11-12-51-46) . Associated Press. Archived from the original  (http://hosted.ap.org/dynamic/storie
s/E/EU_FRANCE_A TTACKS_RALL Y?SITE=AP&SECTION=HOME&TEMPLA TE=DEF AULT&CTI
ME=2015-01-11-12-51-46)  on 11 January 2015 . Retrieved 11 January  2015 .; "Paris attacks:
Millions rally for unity in France"  (https://www .bbc.com/news/world-europe-30765824) . BBC News.
12 January 2015. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20230118000629/https://www .bbc.com/ne
ws/world-europe-30765824)  from the original on 18 January 2023 . Retrieved 12 January  2015 .
79. "Parisians throw open doors in wake of attacks, but Muslims fear repercussions"  (https://www .theg
uardian.com/world/2015/nov/14/paris-attacks-people-throw-open-doors-to-help) . The Guardian . 14
November 2015. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20151119045510/http://www .theguardian.c
om/world/2015/nov/14/paris-attacks-people-throw-open-doors-to-help)  from the original on 19
November 2015 . Retrieved 19 November  2015 .; Syeed, Nafeesa (15 November 2015). "Yes,
Parisians are traumatised, but the spirit of resistance still lingers"  (http://www .independent.ie/world-
news/europe/paris-terror-attacks/paris-terror-attacks-yes-parisians-are-traumatised-but-the-spirit-of
-resistance-still-lingers-34201891.html) . The Irish Independent . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/w
eb/20151120093545/http://www .independent.ie/world-news/europe/paris-terror-attacks/paris-terror
-attacks-yes-parisians-are-traumatised-but-the-spirit-of-resistance-still-lingers-34201891.html)  from
the original on 20 November 2015 . Retrieved 19 November  2015 .
80. "Europe's open-border policy may become latest victim of terrorism"  (https://www .irishtimes.com/n
ews/world/europe/europe-s-open-border-policy-may-become-latest-victim-of-terrorism-1.2435486) .
The Irish T imes . 19 November 2015. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20190322235013/http
s://www .irishtimes.com/news/world/europe/europe-s-open-border-policy-may-become-latest-victim
-of-terrorism-1.2435486)  from the original on 22 March 2019 . Retrieved 19 November  2015 .
81. "French policies provoke terrorist attacks"  (http://thematadorsghs.us/index.php/2015/12/14/french-
policies-provoke-terrorist-attacks) . The Matador . 14 December 2015. Archived  (https://web.archive.
org/web/20230922230329/http://thematadorsghs.us/index.php/2015/12/14/french-policies-provoke
-terrorist-attacks/)  from the original on 22 September 2023 . Retrieved 18 May  2024 .; Goodlif fe,
Gabriel; Brizzi, Riccardo, eds. (2015). France After 2012 . Berghahn Books.
82. "Europe :: France"  (https://www .cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/france/) . The World Factbook .
CIA. 3 January 2018.
83. "Field Listing :: Area"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20140131115000/https://www .cia.gov/library/pu
blications/the-world-factbook/fields/2147.html) . The World Factbook . CIA. Archived from the
original  (https://www .cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/fields/2147.html)  on 31 January
2014 . Retrieved 1 November  2015 . 
 This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the
public domain .
84. "Mont Blanc shrinks by 45 cm (17.72 in) in two years"  (https://www .smh.com.au/environment/mont-
blanc-shrinks-by-45cm-in-two-years-20091106-i0kk.html) . The Sydney Morning Herald . 6
November 2009. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20230214082228/https://www .smh.com.a
u/environment/mont-blanc-shrinks-by-45cm-in-two-years-20091106-i0kk.html)  from the original on
14 February 2023 . Retrieved 9 August  2010 .
85. "Close to ESTUAR Y" (https://web.archive.org/web/20230709190836/http://medoc-tourisme.com/e
n/mondes/close-to-estuary/) . Archived from the original  (http://medoc-tourisme.com/en/mondes/clo
se-to-estuary/)  on 9 July 2023 . Retrieved 18 May  2024 .
86. "Protection of the Environment"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110425005903/http://www .ambafra
nce-ca.org/kid/pages_en/eco6.htm) . Archived from the original  (http://www .ambafrance-ca.org/kid/
pages_en/eco6.htm)  on 25 April 2011.
87. "Nuclear Power in France"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110719055222/http://www .world-nuclea
r.org/info/inf40.html) . World Nuclear Association . July 2011. Archived from the original  (http://www .
world-nuclear .org/info/inf40.html)  on 19 July 2011 . Retrieved 17 July  2011 .
88. Eia (10 September 2010) [First published: 23 April 2010]. "Energy profile of France"  (https://web.ar
chive.org/web/20110429235144/http://www .eoearth.org/article/Energy_profile_of_France) . In
Cleveland, Cutler J. (ed.). Encyclopedia of Earth . Topic editor: Langdon D. Clough. W ashington,
D.C.: Environmental Information Coalition, National Council for Science and the Environment.
Archived from the original  (http://www .eoearth.org/article/Energy_profile_of_France)  on 29 April
2011 . Retrieved 17 July  2011 .


--- Page 37 ---
89. Remy , Morgane (18 June 2010). "CO2 : la France moins pollueuse grâce au nucléaire"  (http://ww
w.usinenouvelle.com/article/co2-la-france-moins-pollueuse-grace-au-nucleaire.N133933)  [CO2:
France less polluting thanks to nuclear]. L'Usine Nouvelle  (in French). Archived  (https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20100621042424/http://www .usinenouvelle.com/article/co2-la-france-moins-pollueuse-g
race-au-nucleaire.N133933)  from the original on 21 June 2010.
90. "L'énergie nucléaire en France"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20100701211529/http://www .ambafra
nce-cn.org/L-energie-nucleaire-en-France.html)  [Nuclear energy in France]. La France en Chine
(in French). 7 January 2008. Archived from the original  (http://www .ambafrance-cn.org/L-energie-n
ucleaire-en-France.html)  on 1 July 2010.
91. "2018 EPI Results | Environmental Performance Index"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20190723205
354/https://epi.envirocenter .yale.edu/epi-topline) . epi.envirocenter .yale.edu . Archived from the
original  (https://epi.envirocenter .yale.edu/epi-topline)  on 23 July 2019 . Retrieved 20 August  2019 .
92. Hsu, A.; et al. (2016). "2016 Environmental Performance Index"  (https://web.archive.org/web/2017
1004102150/http://epi.yale.edu/sites/default/files/2016EPI_Full_Report_opt.pdf)  (PDF) . New
Haven, CT : Yale University . Archived from the original  (http://epi.yale.edu/sites/default/files/2016EP
I_Full_Report_opt.pdf)  (PDF)  on 4 October 2017 . Retrieved 14 December  2017 .
93. Traynor , Ian; Gow , David (21 February 2007). "EU promises 20% reduction in carbon emissions by
2020"  (https://www .theguardian.com/environment/2007/feb/21/climatechange.climatechangeenviro
nment) . The Guardian . London . Retrieved 21 July  2011 .
94. Kanter , James (1 July 2010). "Per-Capita Emissions Rising in China"  (https://green.blogs.nytimes.c
om/2010/07/01/emissions-soar-in-china-and-india/) . The New York T imes . Retrieved 21 July  2011 .
95. "France Sets Carbon Tax at 17 Euros a Ton" (https://www .nytimes.com/2009/09/11/business/globa
l/11carbon.html) . The New York T imes . France. Reuters. 10 September 2009. Archived  (https://we
b.archive.org/web/20221005052515/https://www .nytimes.com/2009/09/11/business/global/11carbo
n.html)  from the original on 5 October 2022 . Retrieved 21 July  2011 .
96. Saltmarsh, Matthew (23 March 2010). "France Abandons Plan for Carbon Tax" (https://www .nytime
s.com/2010/03/24/business/global/24iht-carbon.html) . The New York T imes . Archived  (https://web.
archive.org/web/20110430005617/http://www .nytimes.com/2010/03/24/business/global/24iht-carbo
n.html)  from the original on 30 April 2011 . Retrieved 21 July  2011 .
97. "Why France's forests are getting bigger"  (https://www .economist.com/europe/2019/07/18/why-fran
ces-forests-are-getting-bigger) . The Economist . 18 July 2019. ISSN  0013-0613  (https://search.worl
dcat.org/issn/0013-0613) . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20190821003124/https://www .eco
nomist.com/europe/2019/07/18/why-frances-forests-are-getting-bigger)  from the original on 21
August 2019 . Retrieved 20 August  2019 .
98. "Countries Compared by Environment > Forest area > % of land area"  (https://web.archive.org/we
b/20180108120450/http://www .nationmaster .com/country-info/stats/Environment/Forest-area/%25-
of-land-area#2005) . Nationmaster .com . International Statistics. Archived from the original  (http://w
ww.nationmaster .com/country-info/stats/Environment/Forest-area/%25-of-land-area#2005)  on 8
January 2018 . Retrieved 7 January  2018 .
99. "Evolution of the French forest from 1984 to 1996"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110513083104/
http://www .ifn.fr/spip/?rubrique83&lang=en) . Inventaire Forestier National [National Forest
Inventory]. Archived from the original  (http://www .ifn.fr/spip/?rubrique83&lang=en)  on 13 May
2011.
100. "La forêt en France et dans le monde"  (http://www .lepapier .fr/foret_france.htm)  [The forest in
France and in the world]. lepapier .fr (in French). Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/201007270
11505/http://www .lepapier .fr/foret_france.htm)  from the original on 27 July 2010.


--- Page 38 ---
101. Grantham, H. S.; Duncan, A.; Evans, T. D.; Jones, K. R.; Beyer , H. L.; Schuster , R.; W alston, J.;
Ray, J. C.; Robinson, J. G.; Callow , M.; Clements, T.; Costa, H. M.; DeGemmis, A.; Elsen, P . R.;
Ervin, J.; Franco, P .; Goldman, E.; Goetz, S.; Hansen, A.; Hofsvang, E.; Jantz, P .; Jupiter , S.; Kang,
A.; Langhammer , P.; Laurance, W . F.; Lieberman, S.; Linkie, M.; Malhi, Y.; Maxwell, S.; Mendez,
M.; Mittermeier , R.; Murray , N. J.; Possingham, H.; Radachowsky , J.; Saatchi, S.; Samper , C.;
Silverman, J.; Shapiro, A.; Strassburg, B.; Stevens, T.; Stokes, E.; Taylor , R.; Tear, T.; Tizard, R.;
Venter , O.; V isconti, P .; Wang, S.; W atson, J. E. M. (2020). "Anthropogenic modification of forests
means only 40% of remaining forests have high ecosystem integrity – Supplementary Material"  (htt
ps://www .ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7723057) . Nature Communications . 11 (1): 5978.
Bibcode :2020NatCo..11.5978G  (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020NatCo..11.5978G) .
doi:10.1038/s41467-020-19493-3  (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fs41467-020-19493-3) . ISSN  2041-
1723  (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/2041-1723) . PMC  7723057  (https://www .ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/p
mc/articles/PMC7723057) . PMID  33293507  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33293507) .
102. "Parks and other protected areas in France"  (http://www .parks.it/world/FR/Eindex.html) . Parks.it .
Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20040823215154/http://www .parks.it/world/FR/Eindex.html)
from the original on 23 August 2004 . Retrieved 18 May  2024 .
103. "Fédération des parcs naturels régionaux de France"  (https://web.archive.org/web/2010071200331
0/http://www .parcs-naturels-regionaux.tm.fr/fr/accueil/)  [Federation of Regional Natural Parks of
France] (in French). Archived from the original  (http://www .parcs-naturels-regionaux.tm.fr/fr/accuei
l/) on 12 July 2010.
104. "The regional nature Parks of France"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20130722030433/http://www .p
arcs-naturels-regionaux.tm.fr/en/parc.UK2.pdf)  (PDF) . Fédération des Parcs naturels régionaux de
France [Federation of the regional nature Parks of France]. 22 July 2013. Archived from the
original  (http://www .parcs-naturels-regionaux.tm.fr/en/parc.UK2.pdf)  (PDF)  on 22 July 2013 .
Retrieved 22 June  2014 .
105. Lafferty, William M. (2001). Sustainable communities in Europe . Earthscan. p. 181 (https://books.g
oogle.com/books?id=VHP96jPKl-0C&pg=P A181) . ISBN  978-1-85383-791-3 .
106. "Regional Natural Parks"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20120405192042/http://uk.franceguide.com/
Regional-natural-parks.html?NodeID=1&EditoID=205227) . France Guide . Maison de la France.
2008. Archived from the original  (http://uk.franceguide.com/Regional-natural-parks.html?NodeID=1
&EditoID=205227)  on 5 April 2012 . Retrieved 27 October  2011 .
107. "Découvrir les 54 Parcs"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20190819171349/https://www .parcs-naturels
-regionaux.fr/les-parcs-naturels-regionaux-de-france/decouvrir-les-54-parcs) . Fédération des
Parcs naturels régionaux de France . Archived from the original  (https://www .parcs-naturels-regiona
ux.fr/les-parcs-naturels-regionaux-de-france/decouvrir-les-54-parcs)  on 19 August 2019 . Retrieved
16 October  2019 .
108. "Constitutional Limits on Government: Country Studies – France"  (https://web.archive.org/web/201
30828081904/http://democracyweb.org/limits/france.php) . Democracy W eb: Comparative studies
in Freedom . Archived from the original  (http://www .democracyweb.org/limits/france.php)  on 28
August 2013 . Retrieved 30 September  2013 .
109. "France | History , Map, Flag, Capital, & Facts"  (https://www .britannica.com/place/France) .
Encyclopedia Britannica . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20150614044325/https://www .brita
nnica.com/place/France)  from the original on 14 June 2015 . Retrieved 27 August  2021 .
110. Drake, Helen (2011). Contemporary France . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 95 (https://books.google.com/
books?id=7L8cBQAAQBAJ&pg=P A95) . doi:10.1007/978-0-230-36688-6  (https://doi.org/10.1007%
2F978-0-230-36688-6)  (inactive 19 November 2024). ISBN  978-0-333-79243-8 .
111. "Le quinquennat : le référendum du 24 Septembre 2000"  (http://www .ladocumentationfrancaise.fr/d
ossiers/quinquennat/index.shtml)  [The 5-year term: referendum of 24 September 2000] (in
French). Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20100812105736/http://www .ladocumentationfranc
aise.fr/dossiers/quinquennat/index.shtml)  from the original on 12 August 2010.
112. "The French National Assembly – Constitution of October 4, 1958"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20
130313212736/http://www .assemblee-nationale.fr/english/8ab.asp) . 13 March 2013. Archived from
the original  (http://www .assemblee-nationale.fr/english/8ab.asp)  on 13 March 2013 . Retrieved
27 August  2021 .


--- Page 39 ---
113. "What's in Emmanuel Macron's intray after his re-election as French president?"  (https://www .theg
uardian.com/world/2022/apr/24/whats-in-emmanuel-macrons-intray-after-his-re-election-as-french-
president) . the Guardian . 24 April 2022. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20220424230933/ht
tps://www .theguardian.com/world/2022/apr/24/whats-in-emmanuel-macrons-intray-after-his-re-elec
tion-as-french-president)  from the original on 24 April 2022 . Retrieved 18 May  2024 .
114. "France learns parliamentary democracy the hard way"  (https://www .politico.eu/article/france-learn
s-parliamentary-democracy-the-hard-way/) . Politico . 2 July 2022. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/
web/20230619010727/https://www .politico.eu/article/france-learns-parliamentary-democracy-the-h
ard-way/)  from the original on 19 June 2023 . Retrieved 19 June  2023 .
115. "The National Assembly and the Senate – General Characteristics of the Parliament"  (https://web.a
rchive.org/web/20081205055025/http://www .assemblee-nationale.fr/english/synthetic_files/file_4.a
sp). Assemblée Nationale . Archived from the original  (http://www .assemblee-nationale.fr/english/sy
nthetic_files/file_4.asp)  on 5 December 2008.
116. "Election of deputies"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110704054719/http://www .assemblee-nation
ale.fr/english/election.asp) . Assemblée Nationale . Archived from the original  (http://www .assemble
e-nationale.fr/english/election.asp)  on 4 July 2011.
117. "The senatorial elections"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110615001205/http://www .senat.fr/lng/e
n/election_senateurs.html) . Sénate . Archived from the original  (http://www .senat.fr/lng/en/election_
senateurs.html)  on 15 June 2011 . Retrieved 30 July  2010 .
118. "Le role du Sénat"  (http://www .politique.net/2007081801-le-role-du-senat.htm)  [What is the
purpose of the Senate?] (in French). 18 August 2007. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20100
618060857/http://www .politique.net/2007081801-le-role-du-senat.htm)  from the original on 18 June
2010.
119. Romain Brunet (29 June 2020). "After green wave in local elections, is France's left back on
track?"  (https://www .france24.com/en/20200629-after-green-wave-in-local-elections-is-france-s-left
-back-on-track) . France24 . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20230124184325/https://www .fra
nce24.com/en/20200629-after-green-wave-in-local-elections-is-france-s-left-back-on-track)  from
the original on 24 January 2023 . Retrieved 24 January  2023 .
120. "Takeaways from the final round of France's parliamentary elections"  (https://www .france24.com/e
n/france/20220620-takeaways-from-the-second-round-of-france-s-parliamentary-elections) . France
24. 20 June 2022. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20230124184314/https://www .france24.c
om/en/france/20220620-takeaways-from-the-second-round-of-france-s-parliamentary-elections)
from the original on 24 January 2023 . Retrieved 24 January  2023 .
121. "The makeover of France's National Rally"  (https://www .politico.eu/article/marine-le-pen-for-france
s-national-rally-the-past-still-looms/) . Politico . 16 October 2022. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/w
eb/20230612180546/https://www .politico.eu/article/marine-le-pen-for-frances-national-rally-the-pas
t-still-looms/)  from the original on 12 June 2023 . Retrieved 19 June  2023 .
122. "France – Parliamentary composition and functions"  (https://www .britannica.com/place/France) .
Encyclopedia Britannica . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20150614044325/https://www .brita
nnica.com/place/France)  from the original on 14 June 2015 . Retrieved 27 August  2021 .
123. "La réforme territoriale"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20151230075909/http://www .gouvernement.f
r/action/la-reforme-territoriale)  (in French). Government of France. 18 December 2015. Archived
from the original  (http://www .gouvernement.fr/action/la-reforme-territoriale)  on 30 December 2015 .
Retrieved 1 January  2016 .
124. "Departments of France"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110714142645/http://www .myfrenchprope
rty.com/departments/departments.php)  (in French). Myfrenchproperty .com. Archived from the
original  (http://www .myfrenchproperty .com/departments/departments.php)  on 14 July 2011 .
Retrieved 21 July  2011 .
125. "Circonscriptions administratives au 1er janvier 2015 : comparaisons régionales"  (https://web.archi
ve.org/web/20140430033500/http://www .insee.fr/fr/themes/tableau.asp?reg_id=99&ref_id=t_0203
R) [Administrative constituencies of 1 January 2015: regional comparisons] (in French). INSEE .
Archived from the original  (http://www .insee.fr/fr/themes/tableau.asp?reg_id=99&ref_id=t_0203R)
on 30 April 2014 . Retrieved 5 July  2015 .
126. "Currency and Exchange Rate"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110717034857/http://www .thetahitit
raveler .com/touristinfo/moneycurr .asp) . Thetahititraveler .com. Archived from the original  (http://ww
w.thetahititraveler .com/touristinfo/moneycurr .asp)  on 17 July 2011 . Retrieved 21 July  2011 .


--- Page 40 ---
127. "2085rank"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20120513121037/https://www .cia.gov/library/publications/t
he-world-factbook/rankorder/2085rank.html?countryName=France&countryCode=fr&regionCode=
eu&rank=7#fr) . The World Factbook . CIA. Archived from the original  (https://www .cia.gov/library/pu
blications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2085rank.html?countryName=France&countryCode=fr&reg
ionCode=eu&rank=7#fr)  on 13 May 2012 . Retrieved 29 July  2010 .
128. "Membership of the Security Councils of the UN"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20100706231352/ht
tp://www .un.org/sc/members.asp) . 6 July 2010. Archived from the original  (https://www .un.org/sc/m
embers.asp)  on 6 July 2010.
129. "The Soft Power 30"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20151120204008/http://www .comres.co.uk/wp-c
ontent/uploads/2015/07/Report_Final-published.pdf)  (PDF) . Monocle . Archived from the original  (ht
tp://www .comres.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/Report_Final-published.pdf)  (PDF)  on 20
November 2015.
130. "Members and Observers"  (http://www .wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/org6_e.htm) . World
Trade Organization . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20091229021759/http://www .wto.org/en
glish/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/org6_e.htm)  from the original on 29 December 2009 . Retrieved
30 October  2010 .
131. "History"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20100828105101/http://www .spc.int/en/about-spc/history .ht
ml). Secretariate of the Pacific Community . 12 February 2010. Archived from the original  (http://ww
w.spc.int/en/about-spc/history .html)  on 28 August 2010.
132. "Les pays membres de la COI"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20120402173028/http://www .coi-ioc.o
rg/index.php?id=36)  [IOC member countries]. Commission de l'Océan Indien | Indian Ocean
Commission  (in French). Archived from the original  (http://www .coi-ioc.org/index.php?id=36)  on 2
April 2012.
133. "About the Association of Caribbean States"  (http://www .acs-aec.org/index.php?q=about-the-acs) .
Association of Caribbean States. 24 July 1994. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/2012082210
0530/http://www .acs-aec.org/index.php?q=about-the-acs)  from the original on 22 August 2012 .
Retrieved 22 June  2012 .
134. "84 États et gouvernements"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20091003114546/http://www .francophon
ie.org/-Etats-et-gouvernements-.html)  [84 states and governments]. Organisation internationale de
la Francophonie. Archived from the original  (http://www .francophonie.org/-Etats-et-gouvernements
-.html)  on 3 October 2009 . Retrieved 22 July  2010 .
135. La Francophonie en bref  (https://www .francophonie.org/la-francophonie-en-bref-754)  Archived  (htt
ps://web.archive.org/web/20191028202250/https://www .francophonie.org/la-francophonie-en-bref-
754) 28 October 2019 at the Wayback Machine , La Francophonie , retrieved on 26 January 2020
136. Anne Gazeau-Secret, Francophonie et diplomatie d'influence  (https://www .cairn.info/revue-geoeco
nomie-2010-4-page-39.htm)  Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20230514003836/https://www .c
airn.info/revue-geoeconomie-2010-4-page-39.htm)  14 May 2023 at the Wayback Machine ,
Cairn.info , dans Géoéconomie  2010/4 (n° 55), pages 39 à 56
137. "Embassies and consulates"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20100908014607/http://www .diplomatie.
gouv .fr/en/ministry_158/embassies-and-consulates_2052/bilateral-embassies_1580.html) . France
Diplomatie . The French Ministry of Foreign af fairs. Archived from the original  (http://www .diplomati
e.gouv .fr/en/ministry_158/embassies-and-consulates_2052/bilateral-embassies_1580.html)  on 8
September 2010.
138. Pierre-Louis Germain (12 November 2009). "L'alliance Franco-allemande au coeur de la
puissance européenne"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20100123092331/http://www .oftt.eu/perspecti
ves/article/l-alliance-franco-allemande-au-coeur-de-la-puissance-europeenne)  [The Franco-
German alliance at the heart of European power] (in French). Institut Montaigne. Archived from the
original  (http://www .oftt.eu/perspectives/article/l-alliance-franco-allemande-au-coeur-de-la-puissan
ce-europeenne)  on 23 January 2010.
139. Lasserre, Isabelle (11 March 2009). "Quand Mitterrand, déjà, négociait le retour de la France dans
l'Otan"  (http://www .lefigaro.fr/international/2009/03/11/01003-20090311AR TFIG00073-quand-mitte
rrand-deja-negociait-le-retour-dans-l-otan-.php)  [Mitterrand already negotiated the return of France
to NA TO]. Le Figaro  (in French). Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20170302135655/http://ww
w.lefigaro.fr/international/2009/03/11/01003-20090311AR TFIG00073-quand-mitterrand-deja-negoc
iait-le-retour-dans-l-otan-.php)  from the original on 2 March 2017 . Retrieved 18 May  2024 .


--- Page 41 ---
140. "France ends four-decade Nato rift"  (http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/7937666.stm) . BBC News.
12 March 2009. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20171010194350/http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/h
i/europe/7937666.stm)  from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 21 July  2011 .
141. Roger , Patrick (11 March 2009). "Le retour de la France dans l'OT AN suscite un malaise dans les
rangs de la Droite"  (http://www .lemonde.fr/politique/article/2009/03/11/le-retour-de-la-france-dans-l
-otan-suscite-un-malaise-dans-les-rangs-de-la-droite_1166352_823448.html)  [The return of
France to NA TO causes discomfort in the ranks of the right]. Le Monde  (in French). Paris. Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20160826010825/http://www .lemonde.fr/politique/article/2009/03/11/l
e-retour-de-la-france-dans-l-otan-suscite-un-malaise-dans-les-rangs-de-la-droite_1166352_82344
8.html)  from the original on 26 August 2016 . Retrieved 3 July  2010 .
142. "L'empire colonial français"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110425142925/http://www .memo.fr/arti
cle.asp?ID=CON_COL_009) . Archived from the original  (http://www .memo.fr/article.asp?ID=CON_
COL_009)  on 25 April 2011.
143. "France involvement in peace-keeping operations"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110425024055/
http://www .delegfrance-onu-geneve.org/spip.php?article417) . Delegfrance-onu-geneve.org.
Archived from the original  (http://www .delegfrance-onu-geneve.org/spip.php?article417)  on 25 April
2011 . Retrieved 9 August  2010 .
144. "Official development assistance (ODA) – Net ODA  – OECD Data"  (http://data.oecd.org/oda/net-od
a.htm) . theOECD . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20210324094137/https://data.oecd.org/od
a/net-oda.htm)  from the original on 24 March 2021 . Retrieved 20 August  2019 .
145. "Aid to developing countries rebounds in 2013 to reach an all-time high"  (http://www .oecd.org/news
room/aid-to-developing-countries-rebounds-in-2013-to-reach-an-all-time-high.htm) . OECD.
Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20180623000950/http://www .oecd.org/newsroom/aid-to-dev
eloping-countries-rebounds-in-2013-to-reach-an-all-time-high.htm)  from the original on 23 June
2018 . Retrieved 3 March  2016 .
146. France priorities  (http://www .diplomatie.gouv .fr/en/france-priorities_1/index.html)  Archived  (https://
web.archive.org/web/20100722114125/http://www .diplomatie.gouv .fr/en/france-priorities_1/index.ht
ml) 22 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine  – France Diplomatie
147. O’Sullivan, Michael; Subramanian, Krithika (17 October 2015). The End of Globalization or a more
Multipolar W orld?  (https://web.archive.org/web/20180215235711/http://publications.credit-suisse.c
om/tasks/render/file/index.cfm?fileid=EE7A6A5D-D9D5-6204-E9E6BB426B47D054)  (Report).
Credit Suisse  AG. Archived from the original  (http://publications.credit-suisse.com/tasks/render/file/
index.cfm?fileid=EE7A6A5D-D9D5-6204-E9E6BB426B47D054)  on 15 February 2018 . Retrieved
14 July  2017 .
148. Tian, Nan; Lopes Da Silva, Diego; Liang, Xiao; Scarazzato, Lorenzo (April 2024). "Trends in W orld
Military Expenditure, 2023"  (https://www .sipri.org/publications/2024/sipri-fact-sheets/trends-world-
military-expenditure-2023) . Stockholm International Peace Research Institute . Retrieved
5 February  2025 .
149. (in French)  La fin du service militaire obligatoire  (http://www .ladocumentationfrancaise.fr/dossiers/s
ervice-civil/fin-service-militaire-obligatoire.shtml)  Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/201008082
30428/http://www .ladocumentationfrancaise.fr/dossiers/service-civil/fin-service-militaire-obligatoire.
shtml)  8 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine  – La documentation française
150. "Status of signature and ratification"  (http://www .ctbto.org/the-treaty/status-of-signature-and-ratifica
tion/) . CTBT O Preparatory Commission. 26 May 2010. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/2011
0925211213/http://www .ctbto.org/the-treaty/status-of-signature-and-ratification)  from the original
on 25 September 2011 . Retrieved 27 May  2010 .
151. (in French)  Centre de Documentation et de Recherche sur la Paix et les Conflits, Etat des forces
nucléaires françaises au 15 août 2004  (http://obsarm.org/obsnuc/puissances-mondiales/france-for
ces.html)  Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110725004911/http://obsarm.org/obsnuc/puissa
nces-mondiales/france-forces.html)  25 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine
152. "90.07.06: The Aerospace Industry: Its History and How it Affects the U.S. Economy"  (https://web.a
rchive.org/web/20110920085434/http://www .yale.edu/ynhti/curriculum/units/1990/7/90.07.06.x.htm
l). Yale. Archived from the original  (http://www .yale.edu/ynhti/curriculum/units/1990/7/90.07.06.x.ht
ml) on 20 September 2011 . Retrieved 21 July  2011 .


--- Page 42 ---
153. Gadault, Thierry (13 June 2002). "La France demeure un fournisseur d'armes de premier plan"  (htt
ps://web.archive.org/web/20120311161443/http://lexpansion.lexpress.fr/entreprise/la-france-deme
ure-un-fournisseur-d-armes-de-premier-plan_95084.html)  [France stays one of the biggest arms
supplier]]. L'express  (in French). Archived from the original  (http://lexpansion.lexpress.fr/entreprise/
la-france-demeure-un-fournisseur-d-armes-de-premier-plan_95084.html)  on 11 March 2012. "En
2001, la France a vendu pour 1,288 milliard de dollars d'équipements militaires, ce qui la met au
troisième rang mondial des exportateurs derrière les États-Unis et la Russie. [In 2001, France sold
$1,288 billion of military equipment, ranking 3rd in the world for arms exportations behind the USA
and Russia "
154. "Les ventes d'armes explosent en 2009"  (https://www .20minutes.fr/economie/551139-20100208-ec
onomie-les-ventes-d-armes-explosent-en-2009)  [Sales of weapons explode in 2009]. 20 minutes
(in French). 8 February 2010. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20161207155317/http://www .2
0minutes.fr/economie/551139-20100208-economie-les-ventes-d-armes-explosent-en-2009)  from
the original on 7 December 2016 . Retrieved 6 January  2017 . "La France est au 4ème rang
mondial des exportateurs d'armes, derrière les Etats-Unis, le Royaume-Uni et la Russie, et devant
Israël, selon un rapport du ministère de la Défense publié l'an dernier . [France is 4th biggest arms
exporter , behind the United States, the United Kingdom and Russia, and ahead of Israel,
according to a report of the Ministry of Defense published a year ago.] "
155. "La Direction générale de la sécurité intérieure"  (https://www .interieur .gouv .fr/ministere/direction-ge
nerale-de-securite-interieure)  [The Directorate General of Internal Security]. French Ministry of the
Interior  (in French). Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20240301220550/https://www .interieur .g
ouv.fr/ministere/direction-generale-de-securite-interieure)  from the original on 1 March 2024 .
Retrieved 26 June  2024 .
156. Bruce Sussman, The List: Best and W orst Countries for Cybersecurity  (https://www .secureworldex
po.com/industry-news/countries-dedicated-to-cybersecurity)  Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/
20210415050510/https://www .secureworldexpo.com/industry-news/countries-dedicated-to-cyberse
curity)  15 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine , 13 November 2019, Securworld
157. Global Cybersecurity Index (GCI) 2018  (https://www .itu.int/dms_pub/itu-d/opb/str/D-STR-GCI.01-2
018-PDF-E.pdf)  Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20240501133326/https://www .itu.int/dms_p
ub/itu-d/opb/str/D-STR-GCI.01-2018-PDF-E.pdf)  1 May 2024 at the Wayback Machine ,
International Telecommunication Union
158. "Rafale Sales Help France Reach Arms Exports Record"  (https://www .barrons.com/articles/rafale-s
ales-help-france-reach-arms-exports-record-9efd68a2) . 26 July 2023.
159. "Factbox: France's military and defense contractors"  (https://www .reuters.com/article/us-france-def
ence-factbox-idUSBRE93R01X20130428) . Reuters . 28 April 2013. Archived  (https://web.archive.or
g/web/20231028020507/https://www .reuters.com/article/us-france-defence-factbox-idUSBRE93R0
1X20130428)  from the original on 28 October 2023 . Retrieved 28 October  2023 .
160. In European countries, legal doctrine has long faced the question of succession of criminal laws in
time: Buonomo, Giampiero (2015). "La rivendicazione di Gallo". Mondoperaio Edizione Online .
161. "Country Ranking – Rainbow Europe"  (https://rainbow-europe.org/country-ranking) . rainbow-
europe.org . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20190521004552/https://rainbow-europe.org/co
untry-ranking)  from the original on 21 May 2019 . Retrieved 28 October  2021 .
162. "François Hollande signs same-sex marriage into law"  (http://www .france24.com/en/20130518-fran
ce-gay-marriage-law-adoption) . France 24. 18 May 2013. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20
190725092955/https://www .france24.com/en/20130518-france-gay-marriage-law-adoption)  from
the original on 25 July 2019 . Retrieved 27 June  2013 .
163. "France: Strict Defamation and Privacy Laws Limit Free Expression – Index on Censorship| Index
on Censorship." France: Strict Defamation and Privacy Laws Limit Free Expression – Index on
Censorship| Index on Censorship. N.p., n.d. W eb. 26 February 2014. "France: Strict defamation
and privacy laws limit free expression – Index on Censorship"  (https://web.archive.org/web/201309
22214544/http://www .indexoncensorship.org/2013/08/france-faces-restrictions-on-free-expressio
n/). Archived from the original  (http://www .indexoncensorship.org/2013/08/france-faces-restrictions
-on-free-expression/)  on 22 September 2013 . Retrieved 18 February  2014 .
164. (in French)  La lutte contre le racisme et l'antisémintisme en France  (https://web.archive.org/web/20
101205103557/http://www .ambafrance-dz.org/ambassade/IMG/Lutte_racisme_et_antisemitisme.p
df). AmbaFrance


--- Page 43 ---
165. Niewiarowski, Erik (5 March 2024). "France makes abortion a constitutional right in historic vote"  (h
ttps://www .thepinknews.com/2024/03/05/france-makes-abortion-a-constitutional-right-in-historic-vo
te/). PinkNews . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20240305152542/https://www .thepinknews.c
om/2024/03/05/france-makes-abortion-a-constitutional-right-in-historic-vote/)  from the original on 5
March 2024 . Retrieved 5 March  2024 .
166. Roth, Kenneth (26 February 2004). "Human Rights W atch"  (https://hrw .org/english/docs/2004/02/2
6/france7666.htm) . Human Rights W atch. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20081101192550/
http://www .hrw.org/english/docs/2004/02/26/france7666.htm)  from the original on 1 November
2008 . Retrieved 31 January  2009 .
167. "France votes to ban full-face veils"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20141207163309/http://www .amn
esty.org/en/news-and-updates/france-votes-ban-full-face-veils-2010-07-13) . Amnesty International .
13 July 2010. Archived from the original  (https://www .amnesty .org/en/news-and-updates/france-vot
es-ban-full-face-veils-2010-07-13)  on 7 December 2014.
168. "L'image de l'islam en France"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20140312131944/http://www .ifop.com/
media/poll/2028-1-study_file.pdf)  (PDF) . ifop.fr  (in French). IFOP . p. 22. Archived from the original
(http://www .ifop.com/media/poll/2028-1-study_file.pdf)  (PDF)  on 12 March 2014 . Retrieved
16 January  2017 .
169. The attractiveness of world-class business districts: Paris La Défense vs. its global competitors  (htt
ps://www .ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/ey-the-attractiveness-of-world-class-business-districts/
$FILE/ey-the-attractiveness-of-world-class-business-districts.pdf)  Archived  (https://web.archive.or
g/web/20200718045821/https://www .ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/ey-the-attractiveness-of-worl
d-class-business-districts/$FILE/ey-the-attractiveness-of-world-class-business-districts.pdf)  18 July
2020 at the Wayback Machine , EY, November 2017
170. "GDP , PPP  (current international $)"  (http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY .GDP .MKTP .PP.CD?ord
er=wbapi_data_value_2014+wbapi_data_value+wbapi_data_value-last&sort=desc) . The W orld
Bank Group. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20150704033414/http://data.worldbank.org/indi
cator/NY .GDP .MKTP .PP.CD?order=wbapi_data_value_2014+wbapi_data_value+wbapi_data_valu
e-last&sort=desc)  from the original on 4 July 2015 . Retrieved 1 November  2015 .
171. Jack S. Levy , War in the Modern Great Power System, 1495–1975 , (2014) p. 29
172. World Intellectual Property Organization  (2024). "Global Innovation Index 2024: Unlocking the
Promise of Social Entrepreneurship"  (https://www .wipo.int/web-publications/global-innovation-inde
x-2024/en/) . www .wipo.int . World Intellectual Property Organization. p. 18. doi:10.34667/tind.50062
(https://doi.org/10.34667%2Ftind.50062) . ISBN  978-92-805-3681-2 . Retrieved 6 October  2024 .
173. "Global Innovation Index 2019"  (https://www .wipo.int/global_innovation_index/en/2019/index.html) .
www .wipo.int . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20210902101818/https://www .wipo.int/global_
innovation_index/en/2019/index.html)  from the original on 2 September 2021 . Retrieved
2 September  2021 .
174. Country profile: France  (https://www .eulerhermes.com/en_global/economic-research/country-repor
ts/France.html)  Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20201001071241/https://www .eulerhermes.c
om/en_global/economic-research/country-reports/France.html)  1 October 2020 at the Wayback
Machine , Euler Hermes
175. "These are the top 10 manufacturing countries in the world"  (https://www .weforum.org/agenda/202
0/02/countries-manufacturing-trade-exports-economics/) . World Economic Forum . 25 February
2020. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20230314171606/https://www .weforum.org/agenda/20
20/02/countries-manufacturing-trade-exports-economics/)  from the original on 14 March 2023 .
Retrieved 10 February  2022 .
176. Country profil: France  (https://www .cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/france) , CIA World
factbook
177. France: the market  (https://import-export.societegenerale.fr/en/country/france/market-sectors)
Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20210219011017/https://import-export.societegenerale.fr/e
n/country/france/market-sectors)  19 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine , Société Générale
(latest Update: September 2020)
178. World Trade Statistical Review 2019  (https://www .wto.org/english/res_e/statis_e/wts2019_e/wts20
19_e.pdf)  Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20220630220225/https://www .wto.org/english/res
_e/statis_e/wts2019_e/wts2019_e.pdf)  30 June 2022 at the Wayback Machine , World Trade
Organization , p. 11


--- Page 44 ---
179. Andrews, Edmund L. (1 January 2002). "Germans Say Goodbye to the Mark, a Symbol of Strength
and Unity"  (https://www .nytimes.com/2002/01/01/world/germans-say-goodbye-to-the-mark-a-symb
ol-of-strength-and-unity .html) . The New York T imes . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/201105
01031330/http://www .nytimes.com/2002/01/01/world/germans-say-goodbye-to-the-mark-a-symbol-
of-strength-and-unity .html)  from the original on 1 May 2011 . Retrieved 18 March  2011 .
180. "France – Finance"  (https://www .britannica.com/place/France) . Encyclopedia Britannica . Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20150614044325/https://www .britannica.com/place/France)  from the
original on 14 June 2015 . Retrieved 28 August  2021 .
181. Taylor Martin, Susan (28 December 1998). "On Jan. 1, out of many arises one Euro". St.
Petersburg T imes . p. National, 1.A.
182. How can Europe reset the investment agenda now to rebuild its future?  (https://www .ey.com/en_gl/
attractiveness/20/how-can-europe-reset-the-investment-agenda-now-to-rebuild-its-future)  Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20200919025614/https://www .ey.com/en_gl/attractiveness/20/how-ca
n-europe-reset-the-investment-agenda-now-to-rebuild-its-future)  19 September 2020 at the
Wayback Machine , EY, 28 May 2020
183. "Welcome to the Banque de France website | Banque de France"  (https://www .banque-france.fr/e
n). www .banque-france.fr . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20180613160441/https://www .ba
nque-france.fr/en)  from the original on 13 June 2018 . Retrieved 28 October  2023 .
184. "Foreign direct investment (FDI) in France – Investing – International Trade Portal International
Trade Portal"  (https://www .lloydsbanktrade.com/en/market-potential/france/investment) .
lloydsbanktrade.com . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20210828173932/https://www .lloydsb
anktrade.com/en/market-potential/france/investment)  from the original on 28 August 2021 .
Retrieved 28 August  2021 .
185. "France – Economy"  (https://www .britannica.com/place/France) . Encyclopedia Britannica . Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20150614044325/https://www .britannica.com/place/France)  from the
original on 14 June 2015 . Retrieved 28 August  2021 .
186. These are the world's most innovative countries  (https://www .businessinsider .com/these-are-the-1
0-most-innovative-countries-bloomberg-says-2020-1?IR=T)  Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/
20210924103951/https://www .businessinsider .com/these-are-the-10-most-innovative-countries-blo
omberg-says-2020-1?IR=T)  24 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine , Business Insider
187. "The Global Competitiveness Report 2019"  (http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_TheGlobalComp
etitivenessReport2019.pdf)  (PDF) . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20191009004538/http://w
ww3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_TheGlobalCompetitivenessReport2019.pdf)  (PDF)  from the original
on 9 October 2019 . Retrieved 29 January  2021 .
188. Vautherot, Audrey (19 November 2007). "La Bourse de Paris : une institution depuis 1724"  (http://
www .gralon.net/articles/economie-et-finance/bourse/article-la-bourse-de-paris---une-institution-dep
uis-1724-981.htm)  [The Paris Stock Exchange: an institution since 1724]. Gralon  (in French).
Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110908044848/http://www .gralon.net/articles/economie-et
-finance/bourse/article-la-bourse-de-paris---une-institution-depuis-1724-981.htm)  from the original
on 8 September 2011 . Retrieved 29 June  2011 .
189. Embassy of France. "Embassy of France in W ashington: Economy of France"  (https://web.archive.
org/web/20111009235442/http://ambafrance-us.org/spip.php?article511) . Ambafrance-us.org.
Archived from the original  (http://www .ambafrance-us.org/spip.php?article511)  on 9 October 2011 .
Retrieved 16 July  2011 .
190. "French companies by market capitalization"  (https://companiesmarketcap.com/france/largest-com
panies-in-france-by-market-cap/) . companiesmarketcap.com . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/we
b/20231029040137/https://companiesmarketcap.com/france/largest-companies-in-france-by-mark
et-cap/)  from the original on 29 October 2023 . Retrieved 29 October  2023 .
191. "France – Agriculture"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110104104316/http://www .nationsencyclope
dia.com/economies/Europe/France-AGRICUL TURE.html) . Nations Encyclopedia . Archived from
the original  (http://www .nationsencyclopedia.com/economies/Europe/France-AGRICUL TURE.html)
on 4 January 2011.
192. "Country Memo – France"  (https://globaledge.msu.edu/countries/france/memo/) . globalEDGE .
Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20230404223608/https://globaledge.msu.edu/countries/fran
ce/memo/)  from the original on 4 April 2023 . Retrieved 18 May  2024 .


--- Page 45 ---
193. "Topic: Agriculture in France"  (https://www .statista.com/topics/6215/agriculture-in-france/) . Statista .
Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20220113213540/https://www .statista.com/topics/6215/agric
ulture-in-france/)  from the original on 13 January 2022 . Retrieved 13 January  2022 .
194. "Key figures of the French economy"  (http://www .diplomatie.gouv .fr/en/france_159/economy_6815/
overview-of-the-french-economy_6831/key-figures-of-the-french-economy_1402.html#sommaire_
1). France Diplomatie . French Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs. Archived  (https://web.archi
ve.org/web/20100114024542/http://www .diplomatie.gouv .fr/en/france_159/economy_6815/overvie
w-of-the-french-economy_6831/key-figures-of-the-french-economy_1402.html)  from the original on
14 January 2010. "France is the world's fifth largest exporter of goods (mainly durables). The
country ranks fourth in services and third in agriculture (especially in cereals and the agri-food
sector). It is the leading producer and exporter of farm products in Europe. "
195. "World Tourism Barometer"  (https://pre-webunwto.s3.eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/2024-
06/Barom_PPT_May_2024.pdf?V ersionId=U7O62HatlG4eNAj.wcmuQG1PMCjK.Yss)  (PDF) .
World Tourism Organization . May 2024. p. 19 . Retrieved 5 July  2024 .
196. Dilorenzo, Sarah (18 July 2013). "France learns to speak 'touriste' " (https://web.archive.org/web/2
0130822043825/http://bigstory .ap.org/article/france-learns-speak-touriste-0) . Associated Press.
Archived from the original  (http://bigstory .ap.org/article/france-learns-speak-touriste-0)  on 22
August 2013 . Retrieved 20 July  2013 .
197. "Fréquentation des musées et des bâtiments historiques"  (https://web.archive.org/web/200712241
80811/http://www2.culture.gouv .fr/deps/mini_chif f_03/fr/musee.htm)  [Frequentation of museums
and historic buildings] (in French). 2003. Archived from the original  (http://www2.culture.gouv .fr/dep
s/mini_chif f_03/fr/musee.htm)  on 24 December 2007.
198. Rubin, Judith, ed. (2009). "TEA/AECOM Attraction Attendance Report for 2009"  (https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20100602032710/http://www .themeit.com/etea/2009report.pdf)  (PDF) . Themed
Entertainment Association. Archived from the original  (http://www .themeit.com/etea/2009report.pdf)
(PDF)  on 2 June 2010 . Retrieved 7 October  2010 .
199. "The French Riviera Tourist Board"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110425152011/http://www .frenc
hriviera-tourism.com/regional-tourism-organization/the-french-riviera-tourist-board-06_191.html) .
CÔTE D'AZUR . Archived from the original  (http://www .frenchriviera-tourism.com/regional-tourism-o
rganization/the-french-riviera-tourist-board-06_191.html)  on 25 April 2011 . Retrieved 23 January
2011 .
200. Foucher . "Tourism: The Loire V alley, an intoxicating destination for visitors"  (https://www .tourmag.c
om/T ourism-The-Loire-V alley-an-intoxicating-destination-for-visitors_a67875.html) . TourMaG.com,
1er journal des professionnels du tourisme francophone  (in French). Archived  (https://web.archive.
org/web/20181010174256/https://www .tourmag.com/T ourism-The-Loire-V alley-an-intoxicating-dest
ination-for-visitors_a67875.html)  from the original on 10 October 2018 . Retrieved 10 October  2018 .
201. "Chateaux deluxe: 5 best Loire V alley castles"  (https://edition.cnn.com/travel/article/loire-valley-cas
tles/index.html) . CNN. 12 July 2017. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20181010213503/http
s://edition.cnn.com/travel/article/loire-valley-castles/index.html)  from the original on 10 October
2018 . Retrieved 10 October  2018 .
202. "BP Statistical Review of W orld Energy July 2021" " (https://www .bp.com/content/dam/bp/business-
sites/en/global/corporate/xlsx/energy-economics/statistical-review/bp-stats-review-2021-all-data.xls
x). Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20210708161824/https://www .bp.com/content/dam/bp/bu
siness-sites/en/global/corporate/xlsx/energy-economics/statistical-review/bp-stats-review-2021-all-
data.xlsx)  from the original on 8 July 2021 . Retrieved 5 February  2022 .
203. "The ten biggest power companies in 2018"  (https://www .power-technology .com/features/top-10-p
ower-companies-in-the-world/) . Power T echnology . 19 March 2019. Archived  (https://web.archive.o
rg/web/20190320191000/https://www .power-technology .com/features/top-10-power-companies-in-t
he-world/)  from the original on 20 March 2019 . Retrieved 5 February  2022 .
204. Electricity production, consumption and market overview  (https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-e
xplained/index.php/Electricity_production,_consumption_and_market_overview#:~:text=German
y%20had%20the%20highest%20level,with%20a%20double%2Ddigit%20share.)  Archived  (https://
web.archive.org/web/20210225224703/https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.ph
p/Electricity_production,_consumption_and_market_overview#:~:text=Germany%20had%20the%2
0highest%20level,with%20a%20double%2Ddigit%20share.)  25 February 2021 at the Wayback
Machine , Eurostat


--- Page 46 ---
205. "Nuclear Power in France | French Nuclear Energy – W orld Nuclear Association"  (https://www .worl
d-nuclear .org/information-library/country-profiles/countries-a-f/france.aspx) . world-nuclear .org.
Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20160207220815/https://www .world-nuclear .org/information-
library/country-profiles/countries-a-f/france.aspx)  from the original on 7 February 2016 . Retrieved
5 February  2022 .
206. "PRIS – Miscellaneous reports – Nuclear Share"  (https://pris.iaea.org/PRIS/W orldStatistics/Nuclear
ShareofElectricityGeneration.aspx) . pris.iaea.org . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20240106
100530/https://pris.iaea.org/pris/worldstatistics/nuclearshareofelectricitygeneration.aspx)  from the
original on 6 January 2024 . Retrieved 5 February  2022 .
207. "Nuclear share figures, 2006–2016"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20131001103413/http://world-nu
clear .org/info/Facts-and-Figures/Nuclear-generation-by-country/) . World Nuclear Association. April
2017. Archived from the original  (http://www .world-nuclear .org/info/Facts-and-Figures/Nuclear-gen
eration-by-country/)  on 1 October 2013 . Retrieved 8 January  2018 .
208. "France"  (https://www .iaea.org/pris/CountryStatistics/CountryDetails.aspx?current=FR) . IAEA  |
PRIS Power Reactor Information System . International Atomic Energy Agency . Archived  (https://we
b.archive.org/web/20180701164912/https://www .iaea.org/pris/CountryStatistics/CountryDetails.asp
x?current=FR)  from the original on 1 July 2018 . Retrieved 8 January  2018 .
209. "Topic: Hydropower in France"  (https://www .statista.com/topics/6308/hydropower-in-france/) .
Statista . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20220205071840/https://www .statista.com/topics/6
308/hydropower-in-france/)  from the original on 5 February 2022 . Retrieved 5 February  2022 .
210. "France"  (https://www .hydropower .org/country-profiles/france) . hydropower .org. Archived  (https://w
eb.archive.org/web/20220205071915/https://www .hydropower .org/country-profiles/france)  from the
original on 5 February 2022 . Retrieved 5 February  2022 .
211. Millau V iaduct  (https://structurae.net/structures/data/index.cfm?ID=20000351)  at Structurae .
Retrieved 12 September 2018.
212. "Chif fres clés du transport Édition 2010"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20100601124351/http://www .
developpement-durable.gouv .fr/IMG/pdf/Chif fres_transport-pdf.pdf)  (PDF)  (in French). Ministère de
l'Écologie, de l'Énergie, du Développement Durable et de la Mer . Archived from the original  (http://
www .developpement-durable.gouv .fr/IMG/pdf/Chif fres_transport-pdf.pdf)  (PDF)  on 1 June 2010 .
Retrieved 7 October  2010 .
213. "Country comparison :: railways"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20131004215524/https://www .cia.go
v/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2121rank.html?countryName=France&countryC
ode=fr&regionCode=eu&rank=9#fr) . The World Factbook . CIA. Archived from the original  (https://w
ww.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2121rank.html?countryName=France
&countryCode=fr&regionCode=eu&rank=9#fr)  on 4 October 2013 . Retrieved 30 July  2010 .
214. "TGV – The French High-speed Train Service"  (http://h2g2.com/dna/h2g2/A711785) . h2g2 The
Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy: Earth Edition . 22 April 2002. Archived  (https://archive.today/2012
0716194231/http://h2g2.com/dna/h2g2/A711785)  from the original on 16 July 2012 . Retrieved
21 July  2011 .
215. "Country comparison :: roadways"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20120513121037/https://www .cia.g
ov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2085rank.html?countryName=France&country
Code=fr&regionCode=eu&rank=7#fr) . The World Factbook . CIA. Archived from the original  (https://
www .cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2085rank.html?countryName=Franc
e&countryCode=fr&regionCode=eu&rank=7#fr)  on 13 May 2012 . Retrieved 29 July  2010 .
216. (in French)  L'automobile magazine, hors-série 2003/2004 page 294
217. Bockman, Chris (4 November 2003). "France builds world's tallest bridge"  (http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/
hi/europe/3237329.stm) . BBC News. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110810183932/htt
p://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/3237329.stm)  from the original on 10 August 2011 . Retrieved
21 July  2011 .
218. Damiani, Anne (15 April 2021). "First lockdown in France improved air quality , avoided thousands
of deaths"  (https://www .euractiv .com/section/air-pollution/news/first-lockdown-in-france-improved-a
ir-quality-avoided-thousands-of-deaths/) . euractiv .com . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/2021
0602214339/https://www .euractiv .com/section/air-pollution/news/first-lockdown-in-france-improved
-air-quality-avoided-thousands-of-deaths/)  from the original on 2 June 2021 . Retrieved 2 June
2021 .


--- Page 47 ---
219. Yeung, Peter (24 May 2021). "How France is testing free public transport"  (https://www .bbc.com/w
orklife/article/20210519-how-france-is-testing-free-public-transport) . BBC. Archived  (https://web.arc
hive.org/web/20210601182949/https://www .bbc.com/worklife/article/20210519-how-france-is-testin
g-free-public-transport)  from the original on 1 June 2021 . Retrieved 2 June  2021 .
220. "Strikes block French ports"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20080517035156/http://www .bdpinternati
onal.com/news/StrikesblockFrenchports.asp) . The Journal of Commerce Online. 23 April 2008.
Archived from the original  (http://www .bdpinternational.com/news/StrikesblockFrenchports.asp)  on
17 May 2008 – via BDP  International.
221. "Marseille : un grand port maritime qui ne demande qu'à se montrer"  (https://web.archive.org/web/
20121114060851/http://www .laprovence.com/article/region/marseille-un-grand-port-maritime-qui-n
e-demande-qua-se-montrer)  [Marseille: a grand seaport just waiting to show]. La Provence  (in
French). 27 June 2009. Archived from the original  (http://www .laprovence.com/article/region/marse
ille-un-grand-port-maritime-qui-ne-demande-qua-se-montrer)  on 14 November 2012 . Retrieved
30 July  2010 .
222. "Bilan démographique 2006: un excédent naturel record"  (https://web.archive.org/web/201707082
32900/https://www .insee.fr/fr/statistiques/1280882#titre-bloc-4)  (in French). Insee. Archived from
the original  (https://www .insee.fr/fr/statistiques/1280882#titre-bloc-4)  on 8 July 2017 . Retrieved
22 January  2017 .
223. "People in the EU – statistics on demographic changes – Statistics Explained"  (https://ec.europa.e
u/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/People_in_the_EU_-_statistics_on_demographic_change
s). European Commission. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20190821003124/https://ec.euro
pa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/People_in_the_EU_-_statistics_on_demographic_ch
anges)  from the original on 21 August 2019 . Retrieved 21 August  2019 .
224. "Fertility rate in France: historical evolution 2022"  (https://www .statista.com/statistics/270335/fertilit
y-rate-in-france/) . Statista . Retrieved 15 December  2024 .
225. "Why the French are having fewer children"  (https://www .lemonde.fr/en/france/article/2024/09/13/w
hy-the-french-are-having-fewer-children_6725951_7.html) . 13 September 2024 . Retrieved
15 December  2024 .
226. Roser , Max (2014), "Total Fertility Rate around the world over the last centuries"  (https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20190708151649/https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/children-born-per-woman?year=18
00&country=FRA) , Our World in Data , Gapminder Foundation , archived from the original  (https://o
urworldindata.org/grapher/children-born-per-woman?year=1800&country=FRA)  on 8 July 2019 ,
retrieved 7 May  2019
227. "Bilan démographique 2016"  (https://www .insee.fr/fr/statistiques/2554860)  (in French). Insee.
Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20170803151003/https://www .insee.fr/fr/statistiques/255486
0) from the original on 3 August 2017 . Retrieved 19 January  2017 .
228. "Bilan démographique 2020"  (https://www .insee.fr/fr/statistiques/5012724)  (in French). Insee.
Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20210119110148/https://www .insee.fr/fr/statistiques/501272
4) from the original on 19 January 2021 . Retrieved 19 January  2021 .
229. "Which countries have the highest and lowest fertility rates in Europe?"  (https://www .euronews.co
m/health/2023/03/17/fertility-in-europe-which-countries-have-the-highest-and-lowest-numbers-of-li
ve-births-per) . euronews . 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 15 December  2024 .
230. "Total fertility rate Europe by country 2023"  (https://www .statista.com/statistics/612074/fertility-rates
-in-european-countries/) . Statista . Retrieved 15 December  2024 .
231. "World Factbook EUROPE : FRANCE"  (https://www .cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/france/) ,
The World Factbook , 4 February 2021, archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20220316080837/htt
ps://www .cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/france/)  from the original on 16 March 2022 ,
retrieved 18 May  2024
232. "Évolution générale de la situation démographique, France"  (http://www .insee.fr/fr/themes/detail.as
p?reg_id=0&ref_id=bilan-demo&page=donnees-detaillees/bilan-demo/pop_age3.htm#evol-gen-sit-
demo-fe)  (in French). Insee. Archived  (http://archive.wikiwix.com/cache/20180310021332/http://ww
w.insee.fr/fr/themes/detail.asp?reg_id=0#evol-gen-sit-demo-fe)  from the original on 10 March
2018 . Retrieved 20 January  2011 .
233. "WDI – Home"  (http://datatopics.worldbank.org/world-development-indicators/) . World Bank.
Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20190827161530/http://datatopics.worldbank.org/world-dev
elopment-indicators/)  from the original on 27 August 2019 . Retrieved 27 August  2019 .


--- Page 48 ---
234. "Continued population ageing in France over the next half century – Press centre"  (https://www .ine
d.fr/en/news/press/continued-population-ageing-in-france-over-the-next-half-century/) . Ined –
Institut national d’études démographiques . Retrieved 15 December  2024 .
235. "Naissances selon le pays de naissance des parents 2010"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20130927
161644/http://www .insee.fr/fr/themes/detail.asp?ref_id=ir-sd20101) . Insee. Archived from the
original  (http://www .insee.fr/fr/themes/detail.asp?ref_id=ir-sd20101)  on 27 September 2013.
236. INSEE . "France par aire d'attraction des villes – Population municipale 2021 >> Tableau"  (https://st
atistiques-locales.insee.fr/#c=indicator&i=pop_depuis_1876.pop&s=2021&t=A01&view=map13) .
Retrieved 11 July  2024 .
237. Jean-Louis Brunaux (2008). Seuil (ed.). Nos ancêtres les Gaulois  [Our ancestors the Gauls ].
p. 261.
238. Yazid Sabeg ; Laurence Méhaignerie (January 2004). Les oubliés de l'égalité des chances  (http://w
ww.conventioncitoyenne.com/documents/oubliesdelegalite.pdf)  [The forgotten of equal
opportunities ] (PDF)  (in French). Institut Montaigne . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/201304
21134210/http://www .conventioncitoyenne.com/documents/oubliesdelegalite.pdf)  (PDF)  from the
original on 21 April 2013 . Retrieved 18 May  2024 .
239. "France's ethnic minorities: To count or not to count"  (https://www .economist.com/node/13377324) .
The Economist . 26 March 2009. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20180526185825/https://w
ww.economist.com/node/13377324)  from the original on 26 May 2018 . Retrieved 25 April 2013 .
240. "'Trajectories and Origins' Survey"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20111202054910/http://teo_englis
h.site.ined.fr/) . Ined. 2008. Archived from the original  (http://teo_english.site.ined.fr/)  on 2
December 2011.
241. Oppenheimer , David B. (2008). "Why France needs to collect data on racial identity ...in a French
way". Hastings International and Comparative Law Review . 31 (2): 735– 752. SSRN  1236362  (http
s://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1236362) .
242. Cohen, Robin (1995). The Cambridge Survey of World Migration  (https://archive.org/details/cambri
dgesurveyo00robi) . Cambridge University Press. ISBN  978-0-521-44405-7 .
243. "France's crisis of national identity"  (https://www .independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/frances-cris
is-of-national-identity-1826942.html) . The Independent . London. 25 November 2009. Archived  (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20190320064705/https://www .independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/franc
es-crisis-of-national-identity-1826942.html)  from the original on 20 March 2019 . Retrieved
22 August  2017 .
244. "Les personnes d'origine maghrébine y sont également au nombre de 5 à 6 millions; 3,5 millions
ont la nationalité française (don't 500 000 harkis)", Évelyne Perrin, Identité Nationale, Amer
Ministère , L'Harmattan, 2010, p. 112. ISBN  978-2-296-10839-4 .
245. Gbadamassi, Falila. "Les personnes originaires d'Afrique, des Dom-T om et de la Turquie sont 5,5
millions dans l'Hexagone"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20131002085632/http://www .afrik.com/artic
le16248.html) . Afrik.com. Archived from the original  (http://www .afrik.com/article16248.html)  on 2
October 2013.
246. Richburg, Keith B. (24 April 2005). "Europe's Minority Politicians in Short Supply"  (https://www .was
hingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A12396-2005Apr23.html) . The W ashington Post . Archived  (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20210116210433/https://www .washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A1239
6-2005Apr23.html)  from the original on 16 January 2021 . Retrieved 22 August  2017 .
247. Sachs, Susan (12 January 2007). "In of ficially colorblind France, blacks have a dream – and now a
lobby"  (http://www .csmonitor .com/2007/0112/p01s04-woeu.html) . The Christian Science Monitor .
Boston. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20160827133159/http://www .csmonitor .com/2007/0
112/p01s04-woeu.html)  from the original on 27 August 2016 . Retrieved 15 August  2009 .
248. "National strategy for Roma integration – European Commission – DG Justiceunknown label"  (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20160306140020/http://ec.europa.eu/justice/discrimination/roma-integratio
n/france/national-strategy/national_en.htm) . Archived from the original  (http://ec.europa.eu/justice/
discrimination/roma-integration/france/national-strategy/national_en.htm)  on 6 March 2016.
249. Astier , Henri (13 February 2014). "France's unwanted Roma"  (https://www .bbc.co.uk/news/magazi
ne-25419423) . BBC. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20240303141958/https://www .bbc.co.u
k/news/magazine-25419423)  from the original on 3 March 2024 . Retrieved 18 May  2024 .


--- Page 49 ---
250. "Paris Riots in Perspective"  (https://abcnews.go.com/International/story?id=1280843) . ABC News .
New York. 4 November 2005. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20190320064708/https://abcn
ews.go.com/International/story?id=1280843)  from the original on 20 March 2019 . Retrieved
28 June  2020 .
251. Hassell, James E. (1991). "III. French Government and the Refugees". Russian Refugees in
France and the United States Between the World W ars. Transactions of the American
Philosophical Society . Vol. 81/7. American Philosophical Society . p. 22 (https://books.google.com/b
ooks?id=uUsLAAAAIAAJ&pg=P A22) . ISBN  978-0-87169-817-9 .
252. Markham, James M. (6 April 1988). "For Pieds-Noirs, the Anger Endures"  (https://query .nytimes.co
m/gst/fullpage.html?res=940DEFDE1539F935A35757C0A96E948260) . The New York T imes .
253. De Azevedo, Raimondo Cagiano, ed. (1994). Migration and development co-operation . p. 25 (http
s://books.google.com/books?id=N8VHizsqaH0C&pg=P A25) . ISBN  978-92-871-2611-5 .
254. "Flux d'immigration par continent d'origine"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20120523053018/http://w
ww.ined.fr/fr/pop_chif fres/france/flux_immigration/depuis_1994/)  [Immigration flow by continent of
origin]. Ined (in French). 3 November 2010. Archived from the original  (https://www .ined.fr/fr/tout-sa
voir-population/chif fres/france/flux-immigration/annee-continent/)  on 23 May 2012.
255. "Western Europe"  (http://www .unhcr .org/publ/PUBL/4492677f0.pdf)  (PDF) . UNHCR Global Report
2005 . UNHCR . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20070614025835/http://www .unhcr .org/publ/
PUBL/4492677f0.pdf)  (PDF)  from the original on 14 June 2007 . Retrieved 14 December  2006 .
256. Kalt, Anne; Hossain, Mazeda; Kiss, Ligia; Zimmerman, Cathy (March 2013). "Asylum Seekers,
Violence and Health: A Systematic Review of Research in High-Income Host Countries"  (https://w
ww.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3673512) . American Journal of Public Health . 103 (3): e30 –
e42. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2012.301136  (https://doi.org/10.2105%2F AJPH.2012.301136) . ISSN  0090-
0036  (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/0090-0036) . PMC  3673512  (https://www .ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/p
mc/articles/PMC3673512) . PMID  23327250  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23327250) .
257. "aida – Asylum Information Database – Country Report: France"  (https://www .asylumineurope.org/
sites/default/files/report-download/aida_fr_2017update.pdf)  (PDF) . 2017. Archived  (https://web.arc
hive.org/web/20201226092504/https://www .asylumineurope.org/sites/default/files/report-download/
aida_fr_2017update.pdf)  (PDF)  from the original on 26 December 2020 . Retrieved 18 May  2024 .
258. "Le regard des Français sur l'immigration"  (https://www .ifop.com/publication/le-regard-des-francais
-sur-limmigration-3/) . IFOP  (in French). 16 June 2023. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/2023
1126070820/https://www .ifop.com/publication/le-regard-des-francais-sur-limmigration-3/)  from the
original on 26 November 2023 . Retrieved 20 January  2024 .
259. Catherine Borrel; Bertrand Lhommeau (30 March 2010). "Être né en France d'un parent immigré"
(http://www .insee.fr/fr/themes/document.asp?reg_id=0&ref_id=ip1287)  [To be born in France of an
immigrant parent] (in French). Insee. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20120203052501/htt
p://www .insee.fr/fr/themes/document.asp?reg_id=0&ref_id=ip1287)  from the original on 3 February
2012.
260. "Répartition des immigrés par pays de naissance"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20111026174732/
http://www .insee.fr/fr/themes/tableau.asp?reg_id=0&ref_id=immigrespaysnais)  [Distribution of
immigrants by country of birth] (in French). Insee. 2008. Archived from the original  (http://www .inse
e.fr/fr/themes/tableau.asp?reg_id=0&ref_id=immigrespaysnais)  on 26 October 2011.
261. Borrel, Catherine (August 2006). "Enquêtes annuelles de recensement 2004 et 2005"  (https://web.
archive.org/web/20061212212050/http://www .insee.fr/fr/f fc/ipweb/ip1098/ip1098.html)  [Annual
census surveys 2004 and 2005] (in French). Insee. Archived from the original  (http://www .insee.fr/f
r/ffc/ipweb/ip1098/ip1098.html#encadre1)  on 12 December 2006 . Retrieved 14 December  2006 .
262. Swalec, Andrea (6 July 2010). "Turks and Moroccans top list of new EU citizens"  (https://web.archi
ve.org/web/20120112223503/http://in.reuters.com/article/2010/07/06/idINIndia-49921620100706) .
Reuters . Archived from the original  (http://in.reuters.com/article/idINIndia-49921620100706)  on 12
January 2012.
263. "Immigration rose in France in 2022, driven by labor needs and foreign students"  (https://www .lem
onde.fr/en/france/article/2023/01/27/immigration-rose-in-france-in-2022-driven-by-labor-needs-and
-foreign-students_6013360_7.html) . Le Monde.fr . 27 January 2023. Archived  (https://web.archive.o
rg/web/20230713024531/https://www .lemonde.fr/en/france/article/2023/01/27/immigration-rose-in-f
rance-in-2022-driven-by-labor-needs-and-foreign-students_6013360_7.html)  from the original on
13 July 2023.


--- Page 50 ---
264. "Qui sont les nouveaux immigrés qui vivent en France?"  (http://www .sudouest.fr/2014/11/28/qui-so
nt-les-nouveaux-immigres-qui-vivent-en-france-1751452-705.php)  [Who are the new immigrants
living in France?]. SudOuest  (in French). 2 December 2014. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/
20160717001609/http://www .sudouest.fr/2014/11/28/qui-sont-les-nouveaux-immigres-qui-vivent-e
n-france-1751452-705.php)  from the original on 17 July 2016 . Retrieved 3 May  2015 .
265. "La Constitution du 4 Octobre 1958"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110604145028/http://www .legi
france.gouv .fr/html/constitution/constitution2.htm)  (in French). Archived from the original  (http://ww
w.legifrance.gouv .fr/html/constitution/constitution2.htm)  on 4 June 2011.
266. Abalain, Hervé, (2007) Le français et les langues historiques de la France , Éditions Jean-Paul
Gisserot, p. 113.
267. (in French)  [https://www .legifrance.gouv .fr/loda/article_lc/LEGIAR TI000019241104  Article 75-1 de
la constitution du 4 octobre 1958 ] – Légifrance.
268. "GESIS – Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences"  (https://www .gesis.org/en/missy/metadata/AES/
2007/Cross-sectional/original#2007-Cross-sectional-MOTHT ONG1) . gesis.org . Archived  (https://w
eb.archive.org/web/20180424202500/https://www .gesis.org/en/missy/metadata/AES/2007/Cross-s
ectional/original#2007-Cross-sectional-MOTHT ONG1)  from the original on 24 April 2018 .
Retrieved 24 April 2018 .
269. Drouhot, Lucas; Simon, Patrick; Tiberj, V incent (30 March 2023). "La diversité religieuse en
France : transmissions intergénérationnelles et pratiques selon les origines"  (https://web.archive.or
g/web/20230330154402/https://www .insee.fr/fr/statistiques/fichier/6793308/IMMFRA23-D2.pdf)
[Religious diversity in France: Intergenerational transmissions and practices according to the
origins] (PDF)  (official statistics) (in French). National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies
(INSEE). Archived from the original  (https://www .insee.fr/fr/statistiques/fichier/6793308/IMMFRA23
-D2.pdf)  (PDF)  on 30 March 2023.
270. Wolf, John Baptiste W olf (1962). The Emergence of European Civilization: From the Middle Ages
to the Opening of the Nineteenth Century . University of V irginia Press. p. 419.
ISBN  9789733203162 .
271. "Observatoire du patrimoine religieux"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20131126171213/http://www .p
atrimoine-religieux.fr/rubriques/gauche/actualites/actualites-de-la-base-de-donnees) . 1 February
2012. Archived from the original  (http://www .patrimoine-religieux.fr/rubriques/gauche/actualites/act
ualites-de-la-base-de-donnees)  on 26 November 2013. "94% des édifices sont catholiques (dont
50% églises paroissiales, 25% chapelles, 25% édifices appartenant au clergé régulier) "
272. "France"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110206213909/http://berkleycenter .georgetown.edu/resou
rces/countries/france) . Berkley Center for Religion, Peace, and W orld Affairs. Archived from the
original  (http://berkleycenter .georgetown.edu/resources/countries/france)  on 6 February 2011.
273. Joy of Sects , Sam Jordison, 2006, p. 166
274. "Society2; religion in France; beliefs; secularism (laicité)"  (https://web.archive.org/web/2009091622
0047/http://www .understandfrance.org/France/Society2.html) . Understandfrance.org. Archived
from the original  (http://www .understandfrance.org/France/Society2.html)  on 16 September 2009 .
Retrieved 20 September  2009 .
275. "Commission d'enquête sur les sectes"  (http://www .assemblee-nationale.fr/rap-enq/r2468.asp) .
Assemblee-nationale.fr . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20181225144222/http://www .assem
blee-nationale.fr/rap-enq/r2468.asp)  from the original on 25 December 2018 . Retrieved
11 February  2008 .
276. How to conduct European clinical trials from the Paris Region ?  (https://web.archive.org/web/2007
0117112822/http://www .paris-region.com/ard_uk/upload/document/D176.pdf)  Clinical Trials. Paris.
February 2003
277. "World Health Organization Assesses the W orld's Health Systems"  (https://www .who.int/whr/2000/
media_centre/press_release/en/) . Who.int. 8 December 2010. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/we
b/20201111222713/https://www .who.int/whr/2000/media_centre/press_release/en/)  from the
original on 11 November 2020 . Retrieved 6 January  2012 .
278. The ranking, see spreadsheet details for a whole analysis  (http://www .photius.com/rankings/health
ranks.html)  Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20100105190014/http://www .photius.com/rankin
gs/healthranks.html)  5 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine  photius.com


--- Page 51 ---
279. "Measuring Overall Health System Performance for 191 Countries"  (https://web.archive.org/web/2
0110805022057/http://www .who.int/healthinfo/paper30.pdf)  (PDF) . Archived from the original  (http
s://www .who.int/healthinfo/paper30.pdf)  (PDF)  on 5 August 2011 . Retrieved 21 July  2011 .
280. "WHO country facts: France"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20131111212445/http://www .who.int/co
untries/fra/en/) . Who.int. Archived from the original  (https://www .who.int/countries/fra/en/)  on 11
November 2013 . Retrieved 11 November  2013 .
281. The W orld Health Report 2000: WHO
282. "Espérance de vie, taux de mortalité et taux de mortalité infantile dans le monde"  (http://www .inse
e.fr/fr/themes/tableau.asp?reg_id=98&ref_id=CMPTEF02216)  (in French). Insee. Archived  (https://
web.archive.org/web/20110629191455/http://www .insee.fr/fr/themes/tableau.asp?reg_id=98&ref_i
d=CMPTEF02216)  from the original on 29 June 2011 . Retrieved 25 July  2010 .
283. "Evolution de l'espérance de vie à divers âges"  (http://www .insee.fr/fr/themes/tableau.asp?reg_id=
0&ref_id=NA Tnon02229)  (in French). Insee. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/201607300302
27/http://www .insee.fr/fr/themes/tableau.asp?reg_id=0&ref_id=NA Tnon02229)  from the original on
30 July 2016 . Retrieved 1 January  2012 .
284. "Nombre de médecins pour 1000 habitants"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20100305131215/http://w
ww.statistiques-mondiales.com/medecins.htm)  (in French). Statistiques mondiales. Archived from
the original  (http://www .statistiques-mondiales.com/medecins.htm)  on 5 March 2010.
285. "Dépenses de santé par habitants"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20091212061623/http://www .stati
stiques-mondiales.com/sante.htm)  (in French). Statistiques mondiales. Archived from the original
(http://www .statistiques-mondiales.com/sante.htm)  on 12 December 2009.
286. Tom Clynes, Where Nobel winners get their start  (https://www .nature.com/news/where-nobel-winn
ers-get-their-start-1.20757)  Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20210215132436/https://www .na
ture.com/news/where-nobel-winners-get-their-start-1.20757)  15 February 2021 at the Wayback
Machine , Nature , 7 October 2016
287. "Lycée"  (https://www .britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/352505/lycee) . Encyclopædia Britannica .
Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110915115742/http://www .britannica.com/EBchecked/topi
c/352505/lycee)  from the original on 15 September 2011 . Retrieved 22 July  2011 .
288. (in French)  II. L'évolution du contenu de l'obligation scolaire  (http://www .senat.fr/rap/l97-504/l97-50
41.html)  Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110429205049/http://www .senat.fr/rap/l97-504/l9
7-5041.html)  29 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Sénat.fr
289. (in French)  1881–1882 : Lois Ferry École publique gratuite, laïque et obligatoire  (https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20110605080546/http://www .assemblee-nationale.fr/site-jeunes/laicite/fiche-dates/fiche-
1881-1882/fiche.pdf) . Assemblé Nationale
290. "Compare your country – PISA  2018"  (https://www2.compareyourcountry .org/pisa/country/FRA?lg=
en). www2.compareyourcountry .org. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20210929001406/http
s://www2.compareyourcountry .org/pisa/country/FRA?lg=en)  from the original on 29 September
2021 . Retrieved 4 October  2021 .
291. "Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) France report"  (https://www .oecd.org/pis
a/publications/PISA2018_CN_FRA.pdf)  (PDF) . oecd . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20210
929170215/https://www .oecd.org/pisa/publications/PISA2018_CN_FRA.pdf)  (PDF)  from the
original on 29 September 2021 . Retrieved 4 October  2021 .
292. (in French)  Les grandes écoles dans la tourmente  (http://www .lefigaro.fr/formation/2010/01/08/010
15-20100108AR TFIG00525-les-grandes-ecoles-dans-la-tourmente-.php)  Archived  (https://web.arc
hive.org/web/20160415162843/http://www .lefigaro.fr/formation/2010/01/08/01015-20100108AR TFI
G00525-les-grandes-ecoles-dans-la-tourmente-.php)  15 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine  – Le
Figaro
293. "Guide to Impressionism"  (http://www .nationalgallery .org.uk/paintings/learn-about-art/guide-to-impr
essionism/guide-to-impressionism) . National Gallery . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20090
716162545/http://www .nationalgallery .org.uk/paintings/learn-about-art/guide-to-impressionism/guid
e-to-impressionism)  from the original on 16 July 2009 . Retrieved 22 July  2011 .
294. (in French)  RFI, Le néo-impressionnisme de Seurat à Paul Klee  (http://www .rfi.fr/actufr/articles/06
3/article_34792.asp)  Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20171010120343/http://www .rfi.fr/actuf
r/articles/063/article_34792.asp)  10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine  15 March 2005


--- Page 52 ---
295. National Gallery of Art (United States), The Fauves (dossier)  (http://www .nga.gov/feature/artnation/
fauve/index.shtm)  Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20101105195501/http://www .nga.gov/feat
ure/artnation/fauve/index.shtm)  5 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine
296. (in French)  RFI, Vlaminck, version fauve  (http://www .rfi.fr/culturefr/articles/098/article_63189.asp)
Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20171010120345/http://www .rfi.fr/culturefr/articles/098/articl
e_63189.asp)  10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine , 25 February 2008
297. Musée d'Orsay (of ficial website), History of the museum – From station to museum  (http://www .mu
see-orsay .fr/en/collections/history-of-the-museum/home.html)
298. "History of the painting collection"  (http://www .musee-orsay .fr/en/collections/history-of-the-collectio
ns/painting.html) . Musee-orsay .fr. 31 July 2007 . Retrieved 22 July  2011 .
299. The top 10 museums in the world  (https://www .independent.co.uk/travel/news-and-advice/best-mu
seums-world-2018-musee-dorsay-paris-911-new-york-tripadvisor-a8525151.html) , The
Independent , 6 September 2018
300. (in French)  Ministry of Tourism, Sites touristiques en France  (http://www .tourisme.gouv .fr/stat_etud
es/memento/2009/sites.pdf)  Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110511093631/http://www .to
urisme.gouv .fr/stat_etudes/memento/2009/sites.pdf)  11 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine  page 2
"Palmarès des 30 premiers sites culturels (entrées comptabilisées)" [Ranking of 30 most visited
cultural sites in France]
301. Brodie, Allan M. (2003). "Opus francigenum"  (http://www .oxfordartonline.com/view/10.1093/gao/97
81884446054.001.0001/oao-9781884446054-e-7000063666) . Oxford Art Online . Oxford University
Press. doi:10.1093/gao/9781884446054.article.t063666  (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fgao%2F9781
884446054.article.t063666) . ISBN  978-1-884446-05-4 . Retrieved 13 January  2019 .
302. "The Gothic Period"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110718181401/http://www .justfrance.org/franc
e/architecture/001.asp) . Justfrance.org. Archived from the original  (http://www .justfrance.org/franc
e/architecture/001.asp)  on 18 July 2011 . Retrieved 22 July  2011 .
303. (in French)  Histoire et Architecture  (http://www .cathedrale-reims.culture.fr/histoire.html)  – Site
officiel de la Cathedrale de Notre-Dame de Reims  (http://www .cathedrale-reims.culture.fr)  Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20160717234437/http://www .cathedrale-reims.culture.fr/)  17 July
2016 at the Wayback Machine
304. Loire, Mission V al de. "Charles VII et Louis XI -Know -V al de Loire patrimoine mondial"  (https://ww
w.valdeloire.org/Connaitre/Au-fil-de-l-histoire/Le-V al-de-Loire-siege-du-pouvoir-royal/Charles-VII-et
-Louis-XI) . loirevalley-worldheritage.org . Retrieved 10 October  2018 .
305. (in French)  Claude Lébedel – Les Splendeurs du Baroque en France: Histoire et splendeurs du
baroque en France  page 9: "Si en allant plus loin, on prononce les mots 'art baroque en France',
on provoque alors le plus souvent une moue interrogative, parfois seulement étonnée, parfois
franchement réprobatrice: Mais voyons, l'art baroque n'existe pas en France!"
306. Hills, Helen (2003). Architecture and the Politics of Gender in Early Modern Europe  (https://books.
google.com/books?id=jLmFbEdqBDUC&pg=P A86) . Ashgate Publishing. p. 86. ISBN  978-0-7546-
0309-2 .
307. "Fortifications of V auban"  (https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/1283) . UNESCO. 8 July 2008 . Retrieved
9 August  2010 .
308. "Official site of the UNESCO"  (https://en.unesco.org/) . UNESCO . Retrieved 9 August  2010 .
309. Paris: City Guide  (https://books.google.com/books?id=OtabdzMdbboC&pg=P A48) . Lonely Planet.
2008. p. 48. ISBN  978-1-74059-850-7 .
310. Seckel, Henri (8 July 2008). "Urbanisme : Des gratte-ciel à Paris : qu'en pensez-vous – Posez vos
questions"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20101029152433/http://lci.tf1.fr/posez-vos-questions/2008
-07/gratte-ciel-paris-pensez-vous-4872555.html) . MYTF1News. Archived from the original  (http://lc
i.tf1.fr/posez-vos-questions/2008-07/gratte-ciel-paris-pensez-vous-4872555.html)  on 29 October
2010.
311. In the heart of the main European Business area  (http://www .groupenci.com/uk/ile-de-france/defen
se.com-square.html)  Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20100729154317/http://www .groupenc
i.com/uk/ile-de-france/defense.com-square.html)  29 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine  – NCI
Business Center


--- Page 53 ---
312. Bauschatz, Cathleen M. (2003). "Rabelais and Marguerite de Navarre on Sixteenth-Century V iews
of Clandestine Marriage". Sixteenth Century Journal . 34 (2): 395– 408. doi:10.2307/20061415  (http
s://doi.org/10.2307%2F20061415) . JSTOR 20061415  (https://www .jstor .org/stable/20061415) .
S2CID  163972746  (https://api.semanticscholar .org/CorpusID:163972746) .
313. "Montaigne"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110525201508/http://www .humanistictexts.org/montai
gne.htm) . Humanistictexts.org. Archived from the original  (http://www .humanistictexts.org/montaign
e.htm)  on 25 May 2011 . Retrieved 22 July  2011 .
314. "Le Symbolisme français"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20180307192737/http://users.skynet.be/litt
erature/symbolisme/symbolismefrancais.htm) . users.skynet.be . Archived from the original  (http://us
ers.skynet.be/litterature/symbolisme/symbolismefrancais.htm)  on 7 March 2018 . Retrieved 29 July
2010 .
315. "Victor Hugo est le plus grand écrivain français"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20130723121408/htt
p://www .lecavalierbleu.com/images/30/extrait_75.pdf)  (PDF) . Archived from the original  (http://ww
w.lecavalierbleu.com/images/30/extrait_75.pdf)  (PDF)  on 23 July 2013.
316. "Victor Hugo 1802–1885"  (http://www .enotes.com/victor-hugo-criticism/hugo-victor) . Enotes.com .
Retrieved 16 July  2011 .
317. "All-T ime 100 Best Novels List"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20051128235020/http://adherents.co
m/people/100_novel.html) . Adherents.com. Archived from the original on 28 November 2005 .
Retrieved 22 July  2011 .
318. "Dirty books and literary freedom: The Lady Chatterley publisher who beat the censors"  (https://ww
w.bbc.co.uk/programmes/articles/25GtYStZ3wsmZHBt6BCP51p/dirty-books-and-literary-freedom-t
he-lady-chatterley-publisher-who-beat-the-censors) . BBC. Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/2
0211117185434/https://www .bbc.co.uk/programmes/articles/25GtYStZ3wsmZHBt6BCP51p/dirty-b
ooks-and-literary-freedom-the-lady-chatterley-publisher-who-beat-the-censors)  from the original on
17 November 2021 . Retrieved 28 August  2022 .
319. Modiano strengthens France's literature Nobel dominance  (http://www .globalpost.com/dispatch/ne
ws/afp/141009/modiano-strengthens-frances-literature-nobel-dominance)  Archived  (https://web.arc
hive.org/web/20141018105721/http://www .globalpost.com/dispatch/news/afp/141009/modiano-stre
ngthens-frances-literature-nobel-dominance)  18 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine , Global
Post, 9 October 2014
320. "The Little Prince | Plot, Analysis, & Facts | Britannica.com"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20190122
012253/https://www .britannica.com/topic/The-Little-Prince) . 22 January 2019. Archived from the
original  (https://www .britannica.com/topic/The-Little-Prince)  on 22 January 2019 . Retrieved
30 August  2023 .
321. Russell, Bertrand (2004) [1945]. A History of W estern Philosophy . Routledge. p. 511
322. Kenny , Anthony (2006). The Rise of Modern Philosophy: A New History of W estern Philosophy ,
vol. 3 . Oxford University Press. pp. 40
323. "VOL TAIRE – University of Kent"  (https://www .kent.ac.uk/ewto/projects/anthology/voltaire.html) .
www .kent.ac.uk . Retrieved 30 August  2023 .
324. Williams, David Lay (1 August 2012). "Review of Rousseau and Revolution"  (https://ndpr .nd.edu/re
views/rousseau-and-revolution/) . ISSN  1538-1617  (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/1538-1617) .
325. "Who W ere the Most Famous Existentialists?"  (https://www .thecollector .com/who-were-the-most-fa
mous-existentialists/) . TheCollector . 7 July 2022 . Retrieved 30 August  2023 .
326. Norman, Max (11 April 2021). "The subversive philosophy of Simone W eil" (https://www .prospectm
agazine.co.uk/culture/37517/the-subversive-philosophy-of-simone-weil) . Prospect . Archived  (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20231207180719/https://www .prospectmagazine.co.uk/culture/37517/the-
subversive-philosophy-of-simone-weil)  from the original on 7 December 2023 . Retrieved
16 December  2023 .
327. Pollard, Christopher (26 August 2019). "Explainer: the ideas of Foucault"  (https://theconversation.c
om/explainer-the-ideas-of-foucault-99758) . The Conversation . Retrieved 30 August  2023 .
328. Girdlestone, Cuthbert (1969). Jean-Philippe Rameau: His Life and W ork (paperback ed.). Dover . p.
14: "It is customary to couple him with Couperin as one couples Haydn with Mozart or Ravel with
Debussy ."
329. Huizenga, Tom (14 October 2005). "Debussy's 'La Mer' Marks 100th Birthday"  (https://www .npr.or
g/templates/story/story .php?storyId=4957580) . NPR . Retrieved 22 July  2011 .


--- Page 54 ---
330. "Debussy's Musical Game of Deception"  (https://www .npr.org/templates/story/story .php?storyId=92
338564) . NPR. 12 July 2008 . Retrieved 22 July  2011 .
331. "Biography of Claude Debussy"  (http://www .classicfm.co.uk/music/composers/c-g/claude-debuss
y/). Classicfm.co.uk . Retrieved 22 July  2011 .
332. "Biography of Maurice Ravel"  (http://www .classicfm.co.uk/music/composers/n-r/maurice-ravel/) .
Classicfm.co.uk . Retrieved 22 July  2011 .
333. Schrott, Allen. "Claude Debussy – Biography – AllMusic"  (https://www .allmusic.com/artist/claude-d
ebussy-mn0000768781/biography) . AllMusic .
334. Schwartz, Lloyd (24 May 2010). "Composer-Conductor Pierre Boulez at 85"  (https://www .npr.org/te
mplates/story/story .php?storyId=126668117) . NPR . Retrieved 22 July  2011 .
335. "100⼈の偉⼤なアーティスト  - No. 62"  (http://www .hmv .co.jp/news/newsDetail.asp?newsnum=304
080038)  [The 100 Greatest Artists – No. 62]. ローチケ HMV [Roachke HMV]  (in Japanese). 21 April
2003.
336. "Biography of Noir Désir"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20160430102257/http://www .rfimusic.com/a
rtist/rock/noir-desir/biography) . rfi Music . RFI Musique. December 2010. Archived from the original
(http://www .rfimusic.com/artist/rock/noir-desir/biography)  on 30 April 2016 . Retrieved 11 January
2018 . "Rock music doesn't come naturally to the French. A Latin country , with more af finity to
poetry and melody , France has very rarely produced talented rock musicians. Rock music has
other , more Anglo-Saxon ingredients: fury , excess, electricity ."
337. "French music has the whole planet singing"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20101222105333/http://
www .diplomatie.gouv .fr/en/france_159/culture-and-media_6819/culture_6874/music_5335/french-
music-has-the-whole-planet-singing_13031.html) . France Diplomatie . 22 June 2009. Archived from
the original  (http://www .diplomatie.gouv .fr/en/france_159/culture-and-media_6819/culture_6874/m
usic_5335/french-music-has-the-whole-planet-singing_13031.html)  on 22 December 2010.
338. Dargis, Manohla. "Cannes International Film Festival"  (https://topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/tim
estopics/subjects/c/cannes_international_film_festival/index.html) . The New York T imes .
339. Lim, Dennis (15 May 2012). "They'll Always Have Cannes"  (https://www .nytimes.com/2012/05/16/a
rts/16iht-lim16.html) . The New York T imes .
340. Woolsey , Matt. "In Pictures: Chic Cannes Hideaways"  (https://www .forbes.com/2008/05/14/cannes
-properties-luxury-forbeslife-cx_mw_0514realestate_slide.html) . Forbes .
341. Larousse, Éditions. "Encyclopédie Larousse en ligne – les frères Lumière"  (http://www .larousse.fr/
encyclopedie/personnage/les_frères_Lumière/130661) . larousse.fr .
342. Dargis, Manohla ; Scott, A.O. (20 September 2018). "You Know These 20 Movies. Now Meet the
Women Behind Them"  (https://www .nytimes.com/interactive/2018/09/14/movies/women-film-histor
y.html) . The New York T imes . Retrieved 4 December  2018 .
343. UIS. "UIS Statistics"  (http://data.uis.unesco.org/?ReportId=5538) . UNESCO.
344. Riding, Alan (28 February 1995). "The Birthplace Celebrates Film's Big 1–0–0"  (https://www .nytime
s.com/1995/02/28/movies/the-birthplace-celebrates-film-s-big-1-0-0.html) . The New York T imes .
345. "Cannes – a festival virgin's guide"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20160912231419/http://www .cann
esguide.com/basics/) . Cannesguide.com. 15 February 2007. Archived from the original  (http://ww
w.cannesguide.com/basics/)  on 12 September 2016 . Retrieved 22 July  2011 .
346. "Cannes Film Festival – Palais des Festivals, Cannes, France"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20120
610125315/http://www .whatsonwhen.com/sisp/index.htm?fx=event&event_id=21731) .
Whatsonwhen.com. Archived from the original  (http://www .whatsonwhen.com/sisp/index.htm?fx=e
vent&event_id=21731)  on 10 June 2012.
347. (in French)  Damien Rousselière Cinéma et diversité culturelle: le cinéma indépendant face à la
mondialisation des industries culturelles  (http://www .erudit.org/revue/hphi/2005/v15/n2/801295ar .p
df). Horizons philosophiques . Vol. 15 No. 2. 2005.
348. "Enquête sur l'image du cinéma français dans le monde"  (https://web.archive.org/web/2014121302
1911/http://www .unifrance.org/actualites/11596/enquete-sur-l-image-du-cinema-francais-dans-le-m
onde) . unifrance.org . Archived from the original  (http://www .unifrance.org/actualites/11596/enquete
-sur-l-image-du-cinema-francais-dans-le-monde)  on 13 December 2014.
349. Joëlle Farchy (1999): La Fin de l'exception culturelle ?  (http://www .scienceshumaines.com/la-fin-de
-l-exception-culturelle_fr_10912.html) . CNRS . ISBN  978-2-271-05633-7 .


--- Page 55 ---
350. The cultural exception is not negotiable by Catherine Trautmann  (http://www .culture.gouv .fr/culture/
actualites/politique/diversite/wto-en2.htm)  – Ministry of Culture
351. "La Convention UNESCO pour la diversité culturelle : vers un droit international culturel
contraignant ?"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110427020210/http://www .fnsac-cgt.com/administr
ation/upload/AR TICLE%20UNESCO%20CONF%201602_06%20%283%29.pdf)  (PDF)  (in
French). Fédération Nationale des Syndicats du spectacle du cinéma, de l'audiovisuel et de
l'action culturelle. Archived from the original  (http://www .fnsac-cgt.com/administration/upload/AR TI
CLE%20UNESCO%20CONF%201602_06%20(3).pdf)  (PDF)  on 27 April 2011.
352. Kelly , 181. DeJean, chapters 2–4.
353. "French perfume"  (http://about-france.com/tourism/french-perfume.htm) . About-France.com.
354. Global Powers of Luxury Goods 2019: Bridging the gap between the old and the new  (https://www
2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/ar/Documents/Consumer_and_Industrial_Products/Global-Po
wers-of-Luxury-Goods-abril-2019.pdf) , Deloitte
355. "Le Figaro"  (https://www .britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/206556/Le-Figaro) . Encyclopædia
Britannica . 5 October 2023.
356. "L'observatoire de la presse et des médias de L'APCM 2022"  (https://www .acpm.fr/Media/Files/Pla
quette-Observatoire-2022) . acpm.fr . 2022.
357. (in French)  Observatoire de la Presse, Presse Magazine – Synthèse  (http://observatoire.ojd.com/r
eport/visu/obs/20/do/GP_PMAG)  Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20100929204536/http://ob
servatoire.ojd.com/report/visu/obs/20/do/GP_PMAG)  29 September 2010 at the Wayback Machine
358. (in French)  Observatoire de la Presse, Presse News  (http://observatoire.ojd.com/report/visu/obs/2
0/do/GP_NEWS)  Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20100929204512/http://observatoire.ojd.c
om/report/visu/obs/20/do/GP_NEWS)  29 September 2010 at the Wayback Machine
359. The T elegraph , Nicolas Sarkozy: French media faces 'death' without reform  (https://www .telegraph.
co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/france/3125110/Nicolas-Sarkozy-French-media-faces-death-without
-reform.html)  2 October 2008
360. French government portal, Lancement des états généraux de la presse  (http://www .gouvernement.
fr/gouvernement/lancement-des-etats-generaux-de-la-presse)  Archived  (https://web.archive.org/we
b/20100625023755/http://www .gouvernement.fr/gouvernement/lancement-des-etats-generaux-de-l
a-presse)  25 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine  2 October 2008 [Launching of General State of
written media]
361. Chrisafis, Angelique (23 January 2009). "Sarkozy pledges €600m to newspapers"  (https://www .the
guardian.com/media/2009/jan/23/sarkozy-pledges-state-aid-to-newspapers) . The Guardian .
London . Retrieved 21 June  2012 .
362. Radio France, "L'entreprise", Repères  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110722004341/http://www .ra
diofrance.fr/lentreprise/reperes/statuts) . Landmarks of Radio France company
363. (in French)  Vie Publique, Chronologie de la politique de l'audiovisuel  (http://www .vie-publique.fr/pol
itiques-publiques/politique-audiovisuel/chronologie)  Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/2011051
3064756/http://www .vie-publique.fr/politiques-publiques/politique-audiovisuel/chronologie/)  13 May
2011 at the Wayback Machine  20 August 2004 [Chronology of policy for audiovisual]
364. Véronique MAR TINACHE (30 November 2009). "La France du beurre et celle de l'huile d'olive
maintiennent leurs positions"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110425112349/https://www .google.co
m/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5jvmxWfyZ2tFV A3qcmC7DkX6SMi5g)  [France butter and olive oil
maintain their positions]. Agence France-Presse . Archived from the original  (https://www .google.co
m/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5jvmxWfyZ2tFV A3qcmC7DkX6SMi5g)  on 25 April 2011.
365. "Wines of France"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20100211145428/http://www .cs.utexas.edu/users/
walter/wine/france.html) . Walter's W eb. 17 May 2008. Archived from the original  (http://www .cs.ute
xas.edu/users/walter/wine/france.html)  on 11 February 2010 . Retrieved 9 August  2010 .
366. "French Cheese"  (http://www .goodcooking.com/frcheese.htm) . Goodcooking . Retrieved 22 July
2011 .
367. "French Cheese"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20100827131743/http://www .franceway .com/chees
e/). Archived from the original  (http://www .franceway .com/cheese/)  on 27 August 2010.


--- Page 56 ---
368. Fairburn, Carolyn (29 February 1992). "Fading stars – Michelin Red Guide"  (http://docs.newsbank.
com/openurl?ctx_ver=z39.88-2004&rft_id=info:sid/iw .newsbank.com:UKNB:L TIB&rft_val_format=in
fo:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:ctx&rft_dat=0F91F33FE0903F10&svc_dat=InfoW eb:aggregated5&req_dat=102
CDD40F14C6BDA) . The T imes .
369. Beale, V ictoria; Boxell, James (16 July 2011). "Falling stars"  (http://docs.newsbank.com/openurl?ct
x_ver=z39.88-2004&rft_id=info:sid/iw .newsbank.com:UKNB:FINB&rft_val_format=info:ofi/fmt:kev:
mtx:ctx&rft_dat=13885C564656C1C8&svc_dat=InfoW eb:aggregated5&req_dat=102CDD40F14C6
BDA) . Financial T imes .
370. "Michelin 3 Star Restaurants around the world"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20100724032127/htt
p://www .3starrestaurants.com/michelin-restaurants-star-guide.asp) . Andy Hayler's 3 Star
Restaurant Guide . Archived from the original  (http://www .3starrestaurants.com/michelin-restaurant
s-star-guide.asp)  on 24 July 2010 . Retrieved 30 October  2010 .
371. "Région Guadeloupe-Guadeloupe, a land of cultures and flavours"  (https://www .regionguadeloupe.
fr/guadeloupe-regional-council/guadeloupe-a-land-of-cultures-and-flavours/#_) .
www .regionguadeloupe.fr . Retrieved 7 September  2023 .
372. "Rum and Reunion Island – La Saga du Rhum"  (https://www .sagadurhum.fr/en/rum-and-reunion-isl
and/) . Retrieved 7 September  2023 .
373. "Union Cycliste Internationale"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20121114060844/http://www .uciprotou
r.com/Modules/BUIL TIN/getObject.asp?MenuId=MT cxNw&ObjT ypeCode=FILE&type=FILE&id=340
28&LangId=1) . Archived from the original  (http://www .uciprotour .com/Modules/BUIL TIN/getObject.a
sp?MenuId=MT cxNw&ObjT ypeCode=FILE&type=FILE&id=34028&LangId=1)  on 14 November
2012 . Retrieved 19 May  2012 .
374. "Tour De France 2019: Everything you need to know"  (https://www .bbc.co.uk/newsround/1876916
9). BBC. 6 July 2019 . Retrieved 15 July  2019 .
375. (in French)  Les licences sportives en France  (http://www .insee.fr/fr/themes/tableau.asp?ref_id=NA
TTEF05401&reg_id=0)  – Insee
376. "All you need to know about sport in France"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20170610041323/http://
www .france-pub.com/esport.htm) . Archived from the original  (http://www .france-pub.com/esport.ht
m) on 10 June 2017 . Retrieved 11 February  2012 .
377. "History of the W orld Cup Final Draw"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20080226235749/http://www .fif
a.com/mm/document/fifafacts/mcwc/ip-201_10e_fwcdraw-history_8842.pdf)  (PDF) . Archived from
the original  (https://www .fifa.com/mm/document/fifafacts/mcwc/ip-201_10e_fwcdraw-history_8842.
pdf) (PDF)  on 26 February 2008 . Retrieved 22 July  2011 .
378. France wins right to host the 2007 rugby world cup  (https://web.archive.org/web/20110606170717/
http://www .rugby .com.au/news/2003_april/france_wins_right_to_host_the_2007_rugby_wor_1538
1%2C3851.html) . Associated Press. 11 April 2003
379. McLaughlin, Luke; Symons, Harvey; Amani, Julian (6 September 2023). "Everything you need to
know about the 2023 Rugby W orld Cup"  (https://www .theguardian.com/sport/2023/sep/06/everythi
ng-you-need-to-know-about-the-2023-rugby-world-cup) . The Guardian . ISSN  0261-3077  (https://se
arch.worldcat.org/issn/0261-3077) . Retrieved 12 January  2024 .
380. "Une course légendaire"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20130116131353/http://www .lemans.org/fr/c
ourses/24h/histoire.html)  (in French). Archived from the original  (http://www .lemans.org/fr/courses/
24h/histoire.html)  on 16 January 2013.  – Site of ficiel du 24 heures du Mans  (http://www .lemans.or
g)
381. Hill, Christopher R. (1996). Olympic Politics  (https://books.google.com/books?id=0o-9AAAAIAAJ) .
Manchester University Press ND. p. 5. ISBN  978-0-7190-4451-9 . Retrieved 5 July  2011 .
382. Olympic History  (http://www .worldatlas.com/aatlas/infopage/olympic.htm)  – World Atlas of Travel
383. "Paris 1900 Summer Olympics. Of ficial Site of the Olympic Movement"  (http://www .olympic.org/pari
s-1900-summer-olympics) . International Olympic Committee. 27 August 2018.
384. "Deaflympics lowdown"  (http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport2/hi/other_sports/disability_sport/4113957.st
m). 29 December 2004 . Retrieved 8 July  2018 .
385. "Fédération Française de Football"  (https://www .fff.fr/). fff.fr.


--- Page 57 ---
386. Clarey , Christopher (30 June 2001). "Change Seems Essential to Escape Extinction: Wimbledon:
World's Most Loved Dinosaur"  (https://web.archive.org/web/20071016123550/http://iht.com/article
s/2001/06/30/a20_16.php) . International Herald T ribune . Archived from the original  (http://www .iht.
com/articles/2001/06/30/a20_16.php)  on 16 October 2007 . Retrieved 26 February  2018 .
387. Rugby  (https://web.archive.org/web/20090615002946/http://www .123voyage.com/realsw/tosee/rug
by.htm) . 123 V oyage
France  (http://www .oecd.org/france)  at Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
France  (https://web.archive.org/web/20090207004853/http://ucblibraries.colorado.edu/govpubs/for/
france.htm)  at UCB Libraries GovPubs
France  (http://europa.eu/about-eu/countries/member-countries/france/index_en.htm)  at the EU
 Wikimedia Atlas of France
 Geographic data related to France  (https://www .openstreetmap.org/relation/1403916)  at
OpenStreetMap
Key Development Forecasts for France  (http://www .ifs.du.edu/ifs/frm_CountryProfile.aspx?Country
=FR)  from International Futures
INSEE  (https://www .insee.fr/en/accueil)
OECD France statistics  (http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?QueryId=14594)
France.fr  (http://www .france.fr/en)  – official French tourism site (in English)
Gouvernement.fr  (http://www .gouvernement.fr)  – official site of the government (in French)
Official site of the French public service  (https://web.archive.org/web/20120103101721/http://servic
e-public.fr/langue/english)  – links to various administrations and institutions
Official site of the National Assembly  (http://www .assemblee-nationale.fr/english/index.asp)
Contemporary French Civilization  (http://www .french.uiuc.edu/cfc) . Archived  (https://web.archive.or
g/web/20070827194815/http://www .french.uiuc.edu/CFC/)  27 August 2007 at the Wayback
Machine . Journal, University of Illinois.
FranceGuide  (http://us.franceguide.com) . Archived  (https://web.archive.org/web/20150617101158/
http://www .us.franceguide.com/)  17 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine . Official site of the French
Government Tourist Of fice.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=France&oldid=1287153644"Further  reading
External links
Economy
Government
Culture


